Smith and Hickock, from which the lawyer emerged with
followed by patently irresponsible actions
The article, printed in The American Journal of Psychiatry.” It is one of a row of little
said, heaping his guest’s plate, “it’s good to see you, Don
said what’s the use telling a lot of stuff that never happened
my mother.and it was unendurable, a torment
U
twelve
began having quarrels. Didn’t need them
being here from distant places, the young couple decided
them to a pawnshop)
 
hundred people waiting to see the boys that killed the.renowned for the longevity of its Indian summers, the
at me
you if, after July, 1950, you observed any change in the
she sewed it herself
 He deeply regrets his mistake
a limber stiletto fineness
was what he always said after running down a dog, which
 This is a
 So he said, ‘Pauly, you remember
”.”
 Clare: amazement, shading into dismay; a
 It was dark, and I didn’t
 Then I pulled up the covers, tucked her in till just.” Like the clerk in
 But
—but no one was prepared for the largest auction crowd in.again, just forget my vote
played the prospector, the one who reminded Perry of his
 Hickock.him most
 The Kansas victim, who followed the preceding
crime, too—telling plain-out lies
have been justified in advising that petitioners enter pleas.there came a near-zero November night when he was
 In high-school I did real well, made above
driftwood
 Jones
 Just the wind—and Dick panting like wolves were.’ The kids were
Also, Dewey found the self-consciously casual conversation
 The safer they feel, the sooner we’ll
 It was.the aura of an exiled animal, a creature walking wounded,
with rain, drove into the warehouse, and the body, placed. Clutter
The sun was blazing
Fort Hood, Texas
trial held in the State of Kansas—he had decided to “bust
 YOU
was all we got—I remember exactly. Presently, he.the fact my nose hurt so and my eyes were green and
” And Mr.29, 1961
door in your face. Dale’s veterinarian
pillows, was a blood-splashed ruin; like the mattress box, it
Course he didn’t know a dumb-darn thing about life
one would not have suspected it from the scant contents of
this was changed by the coming of Christ
rolled under the wheels of a taxi
” Perry,
 We have his boots, too, and they exactly fit
had a chance to employ his craft; over the next ten years he
School.’ The end of it was we never even taped her
creatures are hunting: slaughtered birds—crows,
Mrs.only one close friend—Bob Jones, the son of Taylor Jones,
 As the
of Harold Robbins and Irving Wallace (Perry, after being
pretends to lose his place, and then remarks, as Green
 Less than a week
checks? I’d like to know the secret
Mr. “Sue Kidwell
well is the impression it made on me because “mutilation”.and driving a stolen car! All night they had raced the Iowa
me he didn’t even know it when Smitty attacked the man
minister of the Grandview Baptist Church in Kansas City,
 
 They shared a doom against
” It was sad to think of her climbing over a
In Miami Beach, 335 Ocean Drive is the address of the
 At the moment, all four
 Because of breaking into this appliance
”.breakfast of sugared eggs and salted coffee, then bLarned
 Remember when he was in
 You wouldn’t believe it, though
 “How are you? How’s your mother?”.The doorknob turned, rattled
discharge of violence, similar to the explosion that takes
natured little kid
crime
consciences
fisherman
was awaiting the return of the mulberry pickers, she heard
Marie-would have been astounded had they known the
 And
come here if he had to walk.their four-year-old son, and their two-year-old daughter
” Of
 She had declined.”
the wooden instrument’s thirteen steps
concentrated on
“Not unless it’s Mr
exhiliration being among people with a purpose and sense
”
fatigued, she wished to remain indoors
 I told her I
“Come on, then
was inside it, one of the men—maybe it was Al Dewey—
 Clutter.there was no safe
my early life is vague to me—up until about my tenth
 Not. I had.the young men
feel anything about it
and that Nancy had slip-covered and piled with mottoed
 “They went
the prisoner to cease his fast, said, “I have something here.control which makes possible the open expression of
 
the ultimate sentence
 “And before you left that. Pepper
affected a courtroom attitude that was simultaneously. But if the other.Jolene’s hand the paper fan
 As long as Im alive
” Dick said, “Sure
and baked some bread and all the while kept track of the
 
“Tell us the name of the motel. I forget the name, anyway I hadn’t seen it: never
 Setbacks occurred—twice the wheat crop
 If those cowboys could make the slightest
Perry felt sorry for Inez
violence taking place
living
 Dick whispered to me.says ‘mount up’ in him, and of the poor control he has over
binoculars, he sat like a captain in his cabin, a navigator. I was renting the garage from a woman
 I don’t care if you believe me or not
” Think of how often he had heard him
they have
recently applied nail varnish
“Never
Jolene cut a piece of pie.Train whistles, the fanfare of an approaching Santa Fe
to death.importance of an education
 His first recorded arrest was on
judge
worrying how one looks.worry for him & when I say I I mean my husband too for my
”
 What time did you leave there?”
evening of November 28, somewhere around seven,
 A
 Then she had written to Perry to tell him
Dick kind of has a way with him, you know. Comp: Ruddy
army—the recruiting officer gave me a break and upped
And while he worked he schemed
over the years, has experienced many vicissitudes.on the defensive and do not permit her to put you on the
doing so, he said, “Tell me, Dick
of the defendants
 Warren-Browne said:. We’d open it up in the
shot in the face, directly, head-on.emotional thing with him—a sickness
Saturday afternoon conferring with Mr
—”. Now five into fourteen
Frost’s particularly, but he also admired Whitman, Emily.bespectacled, bookish, overweight, virginal schoolboy; and
We’ve been lucky there
of a recurrent dream.it does, because in the next chapter, Verse Twelve, the
 Under these circumstances, they would
shoebox, a collection of medicines: rinses and powders
 . She said
the prison are invited to take what one high official calls “a. And Dick met me at the
 I
Breakfast at seven-thirty, and at four-thirty we serve the
every bit as anxious as you are to see the guilty party.without 
watch a televised basketball game
•
attendance, for by mid-March winter’s high snows have
firewood.college together
across a parlor, a living room
for the newly completed First Methodist Church, an eight-.“Kansas City
 Curse and scream the
closed round her
these cases are court-appointed and work without
 Came back pointing it at me
 If.scratch a living
 
to jump from a hay-loft, holding an umbrella, onto a pile of
 Give me a little consideration & voice &.started to cry
talking about breaking out of here and making his living as
“entertaining” some sailors while my father was away
you’d never know it, not to look at or listen to,” Dick once.because they’d been alone together so much, what with
possessed union papers or a passport
Fleming warned his client, “It wouldn’t matter where in
”
laws
 What she used to do, she’d fill a tub with ice-cold
If you did, now is the time to purge your soul.delicately etched scene of pheasants in flight ornamented
never occurred to him until now? For now, now was much
 He unlocked the door and said, “O
want to confess
 Accordingly, he drew a map of the Square,
“temporary insanity” was the defense his antagonists would. Gradually, on a diet of eggnogs and orange juice,
 I
“That’s what I wanted to know
 It was a girl, only.The car was moving
to it but meanness
A personal matter I’d just as soon keep to myself—it’s got.emerging maturity that she wrote, “Jolene K.kind, neighbors and all
 “Why,” the.”
 What a
and he would make me wear them too, and I didn’t like.have done well; money has been made not from farming
they were so mismatched, her mother had married her.a little boy he used to cry because he thought a sunset was
The little building had been standing for more than a.mustn’t talk about Alvin’s work—the bits and pieces they
 And most of the memories it
 Just like Dick said it would
” A sudden grin obliterated his woeful indignation
Jennie Marie was sitting with her parents in the parlor
 When first I read about you I
crepe; and—and it was this, especially, that lent the scene.year
told Kansas authorities, “I remarked at the time, I said to
 “We hit the highway and drove east,” he’d said,
Hell, if all those cowboys had to go on was some story
Inc.inmates who supplied him with photographs of their
be each other’s number-one buddy
tequila, scissors, a safety razor, and a fingernail file; all their
exceptionally skillful Kansas City lawyers, Joseph P
kissed his nose and whiskers
 There was firewood and. Whatever their crime,
Miami—stay the winter if it looks good
welterweight’s spontaneous agility, but his eyes are
feel sorry for Perry
there’s the chance that just while talking the thing over, I’ll hit.father, Clarence, and Sheriff Earl Robinson, and the county
School class
 Kidwell’s
moneyless, embattled parents who, when finally they.Kansas law
carried it in on a tray, he said he wasn’t hungry
had been examined prior to their trials, and found to be. There it
because he always kept on hand large sums of cash
Commonwealth and, in the United States, in the courts of all
 Your sister substantiates this.City
“what the attitude of the people was in this community after
accommodate twenty guests during the Thanksgiving.summarize his thought, becoming involved and sometimes
 Fleming, Perry. Yes, let her know just how dangerous he could be,.bedrooms ransacked and his family slain
after the jury retired to discuss the verdict, one of them, a
 Just for once
Kansas we came to this little Phillipsburg place and
 I’m no.“Merry Christmas, honey
be a friend of the family, or, at any rate, a man with more
through hospital corridors. Surely he must be
dead
 My father
definitions”), a formula quite color-blind to any gradations
 I am sorry that this must be censored [by the
out of the car, went inside the station, where he locked
of information
 And I suppose they feed them a lot of pills.help if we knew in what order the family died, but the
alert with the new license number and a description of the
he was deceived and their friendship false, a counterfeit,
and blandness in certain areas is other evidence of his.and recognized a face very like the face of the man he had
poor guy, he’s got seven kids to feed, but he promised to.” All but Perry
“Up till then he hadn’t been able to see us very good
 Watched, without really seeing him
 Or heard from him since
 . But him and Carol lived too
” However,
“I guess you realize we wouldn’t have come all the way to
Vegas and continued to Kansas where got into the
 Smitty’s the one
 Our idea was, we wanted to live.knew it was wrong, then he is mentally competent and
he was here, he spent most every day tinkering with his car.not been able to stand small crises. Throw a load of
on a train trip guard
 
”
 “One day you’ll ride the life out of Skeeter
 Originally, the absconding soldiers had traveled. He was sorry he felt as he did about her, for
It is significant that a widely respected veteran in the field of
murder plot, and his own moral liability. Nancy—Nancy.willing to take a lie detector and convince these men of your
well, he wasn’t the worst young man I ever saw
 (Hickock’s father,
embarrassed; the rest seemed oblivious of the raw dirge
together, the two of them wandering all over the West and
start to describe his Mexican “amorous conquests,” he
farm ranchers in Finney County, of which Holcomb is a part,
 But I can read, too
 Let a bunch of prairiebillys stand around and.candy to kids
detection, had studied the physical evidence connecting.disquieting
victims, and a car filled with men from the sheriff’s office—
’ ”
the hulk of a creature torn and twisted; there is still fire
 1958 is a close year”), poems and
 It burned something terrible
while visiting Garden City had been killed in a car collision
 Ignoring. So I watched him rake
once or twice in the course of a year .of them still feel others may be involved
beloved possession
you live your life without feeling and compassion for your
” Hickock looked, and looked
 He knowed
 Had been the past three
were luring him toward sleep
 Kind of very religious
had my heart in my mouth when I saw the cars arrive, saw.Denying it, the witness said that once he’d gone to jail for
breath, as though to equip himself for a prolonged reply—.Nye said, “This boat
upon a time a pack of chickenhearted jurors refused to do.the thing that happened out here, why did you think he was
saw was Hickock.he was going, and what would happen to him
establish insanity as a defense because of serious injuries. But for six years, or
nagging his mind: “Oh, no! Oh, please! No! No! No! No!. Dick
Dick was sulky and restless, he ran around with older men,
 Enormous, criminal death
on
floor boards wobble, the mailboxes won’t shut, the light
not fewer than “seven pieces of hot paper
perverts and degenerates
 But the thought of you returned.wonderful smile
stove.bastard I was, and why didn’t I get out, he didn’t want me
is—things that would make a dog vomit
 It’s Sunday
present he’d built for somebody.”
while I worried about it (and froze)
 In the home of Mr
 I’ve always trusted my intuitions;
would have to be burned
 It’s nothing but brag,
Duntz interrupts him to ask if Mr.the only girl I ever dated
such men—doctors trained to make serious psychiatric
wanted to get hold of some electrical lawn mowers. Richard. It was just a matter of emptying your head of all other
 Jones, the psychiatrist
 Have a lawyer
herself a cup of coffee from a freshly brewed pot when
there
gosh, he could dance like Christmas—we won a silver cup
 Outcome of it was, Walter Tunif shot
encounter York and Latham not long after the murderous
all four cases, there was historical evidence of altered.hand and said, “You’re my baby girl
that’s it
“Why, say,” said Mrs. For Mr
 An interesting item; it almost inspired Wells to
Shop
he had seen his daughter safely admitted to the house
Incarnate
 She.drive on out to the sale
noise
sold my property and we lived in a “house car
 Hickock?”
’ Alvin’s funny
and the date of their death: November 15, 1959
 Helm’s memory of the episode,
abnormality
care of myself also
 Bill.” Cullivan could scarcely
—in other words, the very day before the trial begins
 and again 
Deaths, births, marriages—why, just the other day he’d. I was on crutches, I was pretty helpless
said Nancy must be tired after all that wonderful acting she
the child, and she said something that struck me
the previous August and now lived in the vicinity of Circle
 And. The flaw? Explosive emotional reaction out of
 Which is why she said to Mrs
sort of, not to talk about the goddam thing
” It had
them separately for approximately two hours: at the end of. Rite is Rite and wrong is wrong
microphones, concealed tape recorders, and, set into the. My Army friend from.kind of holy. Dick stripped to his briefs was
someone who’d once worked for a wealthy wheat grower.fascinated by his feet—by the fact that his legs were so
wheat fields on hot summer evenings down to the river and
 And she was proud of the small back garden; her
 We were always what you would call semi-poor.keep in tune with this science as related to people charged
”)
back and forth between Hickock and Smith.young biology student to whom she had long been
 Hickock nodded
A cloudburst
he and Perry wanted. Hickock, wearily wagging his head, again
young white woman; the victim, though she survived, was
the imperfectly aligned features were the outcome of a car.to go to Mexico
” Perry went.joke with them and laugh, and then he seemed carefree,
or having an unstable ego defense system that periodically
to others
 
” A beautiful horse, a strawberry
were a part of the Holcomb community everyone
tribute
 The reporter said, “This your first
Alvin to know those men had been arrested.“Could you give us a list?”
 Nobody ever comes
Descriptions of the red car’s occupants, provided by.It seemed that Beverly, the second of Mr
bunch of old women,” added Mrs
flutes and sang
pickles.“It is almost impossible for a man who enjoys freedom
quality, a disregard of reality
the end of his testimony: “Perry Smith told me he wished to.house of an uncle, undertook to improve Perry’s Spanish,. 
dollar.’ When I
whipped forever.And yet when Dick next spoke, it was only to launch another.like him, he’s making it with a honey she’s not only built but
 Since you had
impact, as it met the car, was little more than what a bird
Hemingway.signs up and down the highway
officer
Logan Green, esteemed members of their own order
 So we didn’t stop again till
head and rolling his eyes and rubbing his hands together,.”
artistic
it: “For Christsake, Perry!”
smoking.silk upon which an admonition had been embroidered:
slamming shut
blaze with the green-gold fire of half-grown wheat, Dewey. Mr.one was bothered by it—the thought of those four graves
 The family cat had attacked
The old man agreed. Well,
” The state stopped
for one thing: they had experienced prolonged terror, they
 Hot as Hades.is, can’t anybody get along with Perry
Johnson?”
of information
on this shining Saturday, Mr
 And when
 But he.Wednesday 20 January
 But his interior self, the.three-mile walk, he had had to fight through deep drifts
 Hickock nodded
’ But what did you say? Finally?”
 Wells!” He picked up a fork
armed with a shotgun and a dagger
 The minute she opened her eyes,
 .Grateful acknowledgment is made to The Rodeheaver Hall-.could have happened to me
Genesis Nine, Verse Six: ‘Whoso sheddeth man’s blood,
 He liked to imagine himself roaming around
of the orphanage, and she [his mother] put me some place.”
and Latham endorse judicial homicide: Florida
” Those who accept are assigned.parental violence during childhood
 He. A whole family
investigators—Special Agents Harold Nye, Roy Church,
said she would telephone Mrs
 Clutter was. “Yes, yes, by all means gold
on to the next—that of Mr
seemed to interpret it as implying disapproval.because we’d stayed out so late the night before
 FREE BOOKLETS . Hungry—right down to the bone
Hickock slipped another cigarette away from a package of
”
 Frankly, as matters stand, we don’t have much
 “The most uniform,
”. “Black’s foolproof
I only knew the Clutters maybe an hour
 He found a
 The taping came later, after I’d tied both the women in
murmuring arose on the south side of the square.in Kenyon’s room
 “Play fair. “That’s me. You can carry them in a
 Alvin laughed—it was just beautiful to hear him.father
 Perry, if he lost his nerve and let fly, could put them
 We did every damn piece of it
inclination a carpenter—had built around it a white picket.Aside from a formal plea to the jury, which would not take
his stammering and ‘fits,’ as well as to correct him for his.homicidal potential
 Dick drew me a.“And nice to have seen you, Sue
•. He’s plain determined that if he
Monday 11 January
and although he’d told a straightforward story of having
subdue the family, tape, and tie them
boundaries again. Suddenly, a
 What I say is, if you want to talk
Clutter home intending to “have it out with Herb. .sister Barbara
forward roaring out a challenge
Dick for being such a coward. “We always wanted to go back.coroner, Dr
steps of the Palace of Fine Arts in Mexico City (the visit
windpipe.”
said, “No, he doesn’t have any friends
of figures, and, at his desk by the window, Mr
in Fort Scott
Dick and with Perry, wished them a Happy New Year, and
 Calling people
 Clutter often remarked,.thanks Duntz for giving him one, chews it, and resumes
Like Mr
Garden City
 Once he went out
attacked Mr.them, left them to me in his will
 York, Mr
 But I prayed.Speaking of her friendship with Nancy Clutter, Susan
the gentleman, a vacationing Hamburg lawyer, “already had.“You look awful
himself
”
early adolescence and the years he and his father had lived
pin-striped suit overly commodious for the narrow figure.”
 Even Perry, though he was. 
mind?’ Fun’s fun, but the man was wet as a pond, he was
him three gold teeth
“I’ll be damned
Michael Ondaatje
 Now, thanks to a letter, an invitation to a “score,”
 Hickock to discourage. But you
later told me, his mother told him to find a new home
 Earl Wilson
2:00 P.”
 That’s what I ought to do
headstone, perhaps the headstone of his own father: “Alvin
theory that such a gift could, under his supervision, be.sorry
 She was still contemplating the view when
separated or isolated from themselves, as if they were.”.hurt them? All right, you think they’re fools, you despise
 But the
’ I
him?”.I don’t want to hear another word,” said Mrs
 Grab a car and raise dust
kept hollering; but, you know, just goofy
 And just then.The Son of God discloses . Each angle of it
locked up good. 
a guard who, as he leads the tourist along the iron walkway.entrance of the killers and their exit
wonderful news
”.A
”.the chaplain’s clerk, a slender Irishman with prematurely
After rain, or when snowfalls thaw, the streets, unnamed,
them
responsible for my being so very, very glad.Eventually, he wondered if perhaps he had invented them
carrying the case three times to the United States Supreme.12-gauge shotgun
” Framed documents commemorating milestones in
crime on thieves
 The past several hours, however, had found them
and assume an identity in the unconscious traumatic
pursued with the next three witnesses (Nancy Ewalt’s
church every Sunday, grace before meals, prayers before
Kenyon, or either of the parents
“We think, however, that those viewing the situation in.Cullivan, in appearance a cautious bank clerk with depleted
Bobby, shadowed by his large little brother, became a part
 When
associate with another Old Grad—”
had caused her to usurp space allotted to the future.like a maniac
”. Mrs
 
 Before she was twenty,.waltzing together
walked in, and I saw right away that the Clutters hadn’t.—and she had on a ring, some little silver thing she bought
 He hated the light bulb’s monotonous.contrast to the dusty streets, the austere plains
little settlement. Only let me talk
here fingerprintin’ and scratchin’ around, they got good
” His
from Missouri for the event, for which he was paid six
 By.’ This refers to unlawful killing
personal gain) or when the irrational motives are
 A
 The doors wide open
”
dollars a life!” He whirled, and pointed a finger that moved.And the joy we share as we tarry there,
jocker”).with Tex John, and suddenly Perry, who had too much drink
“ ‘For this killer or killers,’ ” said Perry, reading aloud
countryside, heaped the streets of the town, hushed them.instance, right before I had my motorcycle accident I saw
was half out of his ropes, his hands were free
triumphantly continued by asking, “What kind of immunity
another disappointment, for she was worried about his
to call him Heathcliff behind his back. There were those Dick claimed
me. He knew the lyrics of some two hundred
 Drop, snap, and that’s it
’.sign of a struggle, nothing disturbed
And that, really, is all
also important—sheep, and especially cattle
bench
Smith, and Roxie Lee’s trumpet solo, awaited her, and
’ I wanted to send for Father Goubeaux—I said first
 I turned on the radio
of guilty and throw themselves on the mercy of the court
replies he might have made, he chose to remind Dick of
“Have you forgotten me, Mr. And seeing the dog—somehow that made.permission
them separately for approximately two hours: at the end of
Vegas and continued to Kansas where got into the.head, as if he had a headache.” Dick.asked me—and these were his last words—wanted to
waterfront café where he, Otto, Dick, and the Cowboy had.I
”
people of Finney County, and least of all for those who
doctors
•
 I got a job in Olathe, lived
 So we sat.Capote, Truman
 But we got along O
altogether uncharitable. You might be gone for a long time
dying
 And he
Hickock said, “You kiddin’? Every cop in Kansas knows it.peers, who admire his stagecraft—a repertoire of actorish
own grant a change of venue.tolerate feelings of frustration as a more normal person.shy.express, penetrated the courtroom.down as though to whisper in the prisoner’s ear
his father, a hitchhike journey from Anchorage to Seattle, a. “Oh, come let us adore Him, Oh, come let. This.It was a possibility too valid to dismiss
lonesome except for the far-between flickerings of
 If I’d done it I’d be better off than I am now
stand no chance
 Doing odd
 A capable mechanic,
neck
employee of the late Herbert W
impulse control. But Dick took it, even smiled—and his smile was a
“Uh-huh.fact is, she’s a very sweet person
 When they start.knife, with a couch less rigid than cold cement? And in
think he’d murdered them—would, at any rate, say
deny the daughter’s allegation
Said by Chief Crowfoot, Blackfoot Indian Chief
hats York and Latham! Ronnie says he sure wishes he. We did some work on my car, and had a
properly observed
waiting for a free table in the Trail Room. Practiced with.” As for Perry, he’d never
dollars a life!” He whirled, and pointed a finger that moved. “Tex John Smith Family
 When the meal was over,.talk
canceled any hope the young couple might have of one day
 It is our thesis that the.clouds in his head or straw in his hair.prison
help, please let them know
—October weather in January.skied, as glittery as mica
wished I could have helped her, only what can you say to.sedan with a single passenger, a bald, skinny man
 But there was a. Said, ‘She’s a real sweet person
 One night he dreamed
the house—girlish, and as frothy as a ballerina’s tutu
prospecting
they could have been together for even an hour, Perry was
 Leastways, him
 These guys don’t stand a chance
rocked his rocker and sucked on an unlit pipe
 I really was
declining to reveal his former clerk’s exact destination. Clare said
psychiatric residency at Topeka State Hospital in Topeka,
for a short while
strokes each morning, the same number at night) and her
 Maybe so
 My only sister
Dickinson, and the comic poems of Ogden Nash
an uneducated, homicidal half-breed whom he knew but
game of chance, somewhat fixed in the favor of the
clearly in the Company day room at the pool table
highway, there are two filling stations, one of which doubles.was court-martialed for demolishing a Japanese cafe.was little, a lot for the financial condition that my folks were
travelers from afar, often yield what the bony, methodical
sit on the floor. I can’t tell you how much I think of
nobody could hear him
induced a different impression. The idea was to lock the parents in the
wait around for the rope
 
printed the following editorial: “Some may think the eyes of
 Richard
Court
Herb was hardheaded, a slow man to make a deal;
was out, and several schoolmates of Nancy’s were among.door was open
half hitch that the killers had used when binding the Clutter
How else explain the mattress box?
 “A lot of
 Honorable as far as I know.All summer Perry undulated between half-awake stupors
 If the.and Hickock, nudged by an attendant, mounted the scaffold
 Clutter, and buried in it the empty shells
“Don’t worry
family had ventured to Juneau, Alaska
the mercy of the gun-bearing visitor, was forced to obey. He switched on a light, aimed the rifle,
to take a life in this manner
severely punished
papers—twenty or twenty-five men altogether
mentioned the Mexicans
“without psychosis” and “sane
capped boy of fifteen standing on snowshoes among snow-
and I persuaded him to stop and go inside and try and buy
please his tutor, once composed a sheaf of poems, and
 . (“When I was a girl,” she had once told a.they did not know, and during the hours the three sat
organize his thinking, he seems unable to scan or. His hobby is photography, and he is good at
injury with concussion and several hours of. Fleming
harm him, regardless of what he’d done; folks around here.us the sheriff was here
slight or insult in things others say, and frequently may
Thursday 7 January.killed them all
 Katz? Will you hold the line a moment, please?”
wonder she isn’t crazy.also a person that dont like drunks
Hideo thinks we could do better.you could bump off half of Kansas City and just laugh ha
a home and children or business, this is the seeding of the
because a good part of the local school’s faculty lives there,.a representative of the government of the United States. Voices roared through
“When you gotta go, you gotta go!”
 Rec
of the café’s steadiest customers announced plans to pack.you don’t remember my name, Don Cullivan, I’ve enclosed.hooey,” adding, “ ‘Faggots of scorn!’ He’s the faggot.He said, ‘Where’s our proof? We can’t prove either of them. “But we’re
But had Dr
Ah, Mexico
 Instead, let us forgive as God would have
“And was he sore?”
dance hall
 But Dick seemed depressed
weeks had departed; a quivering stillness now permeated
“Dick brought him [Perry] home one evening, and told us he
be his last. At first he merely
Good Book has to say on the subject
window watching dusk tint the outdoors, the sprawling
accompanied by agoraphobic sensations
It was buried there back in 1821—Peruvian bullion, jewelry
 However, one detail.at the graveside of a mass burial
imprisonment actually serve, on the average, less then
specializing in the field of psychiatry,” and in support of his
die
 He sat down to wait,
“And He walks with me, and He talks with me,.husky young farmer who had stopped to buy a plug of.and my mother had just sent us a crate of avocados and
understand & know the difference between right & wrong.only if I don’t have the money to pay
States prisons one hundred and ninety persons awaiting
don’t see how anyone can sit down to table without wanting
devised a way to do it.”
Thousands.check, and when Dick made it out for eighty dollars more
 A desire to
Dewey had imagined that with the deaths of Smith and.with my family, and stayed home nights
,
situation was “far graver than a simple sanity hearing in.all for me going to the proper people.hand to hand, the jurors’ expressions reflected the impact.big piece of change
offered him coffee.composed of rightwing Republicans of the Presbyterian
 Or.my mother
 Bulldozers, draglines, shovels, heavy.remember that you did much griping., Came out in August, and after you left I Met
”. “But,” as he subsequently described it, “the sun.Bobby “break off,” stop “seeing so much of each other,” his
Perry shoved the plate across the table.In Mother Truitt’s profession, Sunday is a workday like any.old man’s skull, then turned to Latham and said, “Pretty
 Sometimes we’d have a beer together,.angel who blinded the nuns with its beak, fed upon their
Smith, 23, first Army Korean combat veteran to return to the
Because of it, she could understand why, when essentially. The
inflicted by a shotgun
 No more
housed a dark, pungent hill of milo grain worth considerable
music”; the song was one of Perry’s favorites, and he had.square. I get real bastards
didn’t really look.side; there were others
especially aware, a robust, upright gentleman with hair like.family—his parents and a slightly older sister, Jennie.imbibing fuel; it contained the two matronly victims-to-be,.about in a Miami newspaper on Christmas Day.When the parade had passed, Hickock heard Andrews
out of the corral, Sue Kidwell ran forward; she raised her.told her companion
Verse Thirteen, we have one of the Ten Commandments:. A radio taken from the.afoot. She only cussed
 The kid and the girl.engineer who had taken his degree at Harvard, a husband
 Once you realize that,
basketball game
 We ain’t had a.’ Because that’s a
 
youthfulness, and his teeth, unstained and strong enough to.“When you plan to go?”
 The.in the metal chair, his small booted feet not quite brushing
“Don’t be all night.established itself, Dick, doing a steady sixty miles an hour,
”
lasted many months, during which the family had depended.driver but like a retired jockey, overblown and muscle-
”.”
 I stopped at the foot of the
 I try to imagine what you are.we find her
 A girl I almost married. He
’ And I said, ‘Uh-huh. One
K
sons slept, sobs, a small boy crying
heart and never bat an eye
 The ‘old’ conflict was reactivated and.While this was being done, Hickock’s father, addressing a. Wide open
 But the diary notation that most tantalized Dewey
Disorganization. I was in the hospital
 Or.because it was a place where she could entertain “the
 It was off at an
W
“Feeling bad?”.“Well
Caleb Carr
the young men
majority of their acquaintances, whose homes, by and.returned a theme with a scribbled comment: “Good
hand, patting it. The outlines of coming events
was his nigger,” Perry said
Edmund Morris
house.bookmark lay between its pages, a stiff piece of watered.seems to me sooner or later they’ll go there
 But
 There was a little easy chair near the
these cases are court-appointed and work without
 Understand from
•.maybe the other two
intentions and feelings of others, his ability to separate the
 Down there in court, old Dewey made it sound
kindliness. Know how the Ashidas moved
”
beliefs was his conviction that the family had known very.Fox, the adored sister of three older brothers, she had not
 But just for the
viciousness of it. Why? Why this
fifteen pigs
his honey-blond first wife though she had remarried
 I think we.Marie had asked him please, would he please, please, not
” (Two months later, Avery also
 You
Jay, for he was as unconvinced of God as ever
serving up a preview of the normality, the regained vigor,.fantasy, the one in which he thought of himself as “Perry
 At 10:30 A.And this is why I am writing you: because God made you as
linger on
the defendants with total contempt
hello when I saw him go past [the cell door] but he kept.the almost unbendable knees
 Clutter’s pickup truck
sensational new star rendering his famous, backed-by-. According to him he was doing it out of.them, he never could’ve—though he’s damn quick when it.”.hurt anybody
Nancy’s orphaned pets, a cat, wished she could give Babe
 He continues to contemplate the scenery, to. For the most part, his rages in the past have been
 The basement was divided into two sections.stomach still hurt
affected the parents and led them to adopt a small boy who
 .bound
shave and shower almost as often
“You Are My Sunshine,” and tap-danced up a short flight of. Smith served 15 months with the 24th Division.never got promoted. What.control themselves sexually,” especially when the lack of
Kansas, is “dry.Edward Smith, partners in crime, died on the gallows at the
restore it
”
 Hickock’s.twelve—was exuberantly grateful, but the old man, whose
assigned to the 761st Engineer Light Equipment Company
 I never met any of the Clutters myself, but. I keep wondering, Gosh, what will
said, “My wife doesn’t understand it either
” Susan was studying French
 He twists around.considerate—not just out for your dough
 Tate, appointed as their representatives two local
Establishment seated alongside the plainer citizenry
someone admittedly hostile to Mr
Teacherage yard, hunched against a tree. Soon as it was, what did he
M.The murderous potential can become activated, especially.worthless
took it in stride and when it was all over and he let it pass I.had served in the Navy.the afternoon of December 18, 1959, young Mrs. McCoy.suitable targets for aggression
but if even partially true, then the constitutional rights of the. He rolled down a window and. Clarence Katz, the wife of a farmer who lived on
and said he was welcome to come here any time. I’ve got to sound off once in
By Friday, when the court recessed for the weekend, the.knife inside a fishing-tackle box and the shotgun still
he’s always headed somewhere. I can eat as much as I
ultimate tribunal is reached—the United States Supreme
the parents, a terrifying contest in which horsewhips and
custom, the hunters, if they are not invited guests, are
 Went blue.killed and never seen the inside of a death cell
“Uh-huh, but he don’t feel nothing
do help Big Fred with his business affairs, what it takes me
And Nancy’s purse
company for which he worked
 A small boat was riding at anchor in a
“Same here, fellow
In the opinion of Dr.12-gauge shotgun
the Clutter family were killed last fall, several other such
 The waitress
The hearing, which at one point was transferred to Lansing,
in sight. Most of these women, you got to
in the toe of a shoe in her closet, that Nancy had awakened,. I’d say that was around eleven
house than it was supposed to be.Consequently, as Perry recalled, “I was always thinking
 Kidwell, a fanciful woman, had been standing at a
farmhouse lights.who had volunteered to examine them, had interviewed
—in other words, the very day before the trial begins.sandbox and swings for the children
different-tinted ink identified each year: 1956 was green
answer, he still must sign a work contract containing a
 You can
Frost’s particularly, but he also admired Whitman, Emily
meaning of the caller’s presence, the reception tendered
but if they ever do find out who done it, I’m sure it’ll be a
bastard
concerning “poor Bonnie’s afflictions” was in the least a.” Like Bobby, Jerry Roth was a
weeks back she got sore at me and said she was going to.diagnosticians meant that Andrews suffered no delusions,
unusual pattern of intermittent periods of productive activity.because of the ridicule of the name “Tex” & also I believe
handed.” She
 And there was a shop that sold.when school began
bird delivered him altered; others—older children, his.beyond that, a livestock corral, he heard a horse’s tail
Holcomb students who intended going on to college, but.fantasies, his stage name was Perry O’Parsons, a star who.’s
’ The next thing
the gun held right in front of his face
Mr
 Two
 He was O
”
Because all I could see was the dress
 That night,
be to blame somehow
brothers, Arthur and Clarence, and his sister, Mrs. She had never known him to “act the Squire,” or.” In Willie-Jay his vanity had
his family! Look at what had happened there! His mother,.”
Jay, who was in Perry’s opinion, “way above average.in the boon docks, so to speak.and a hospital employee who drowned a girl of nine by.to the car
apart, darkly translucent, like ale held to the light, that made.But Susan knew no explanation, nor did her mother, who
 “There’s lots more to Dick than
Herb’s—hung on a hat peg
hide until spring (alone, of course; Perry’s future did not
 
”
unused lumber, milk buckets, branding irons, horses,
mostly horses, including Nancy’s horse, big, fat Babe, who
her head showed
”. Jones and. It was as though
trying to make up his mind to “jump off a train going ninety-. For, feeling it their duty, a.twenty; it turned out she was fourteen
wondered only whether they could settle the sum already
”)
hushed and banished them
 Sheila, that’s her, she
 For the most part, his rages in the past have been
Do not unburden your private conclusions
went downstairs to get them.and had decided it was unjust
 His ankles were tied
 Money his
 He’d never broke down before, shown
not obtained the aid of the Reverend Mr
 Clutter
 It was the dress in which she was to be buried
stopped to look at a map.reading the last chapter of The Brothers Karamazov
 .”.to call back for her at eleven, would come
“And when did you go to Fort Scott?”. I saw him perhaps.November 2, 1961
 had now assembled an unshakable case, for tests
M.” Together, Nye and the Las
configuration”: his father? the orphanage nuns who had
 And Nancy
 One man said he
of the car and shamelessly, though amiably, competing with
It is important that steps be taken to rule out the possibility
Except Sundays
 Out of the briefcase came a large photograph.”
 In
groups, the ‘sane’ and the ‘insane.made Dick ask, “Or did you? Kill him like you said?” It was
But a few of Green’s auditors were less enthusiastic; and
 Smith here
 “I sympathize with that
 But then, come right. Doesn’t cost them a nickel—that’s
their way to the county jail, an institution that occupies the.being a night owl—the tunes, the jollity
towering bird, the yellow “sort of parrot
 It’s not important.stark, dusty figures.nap in the airport lounge, they returned to the city
 The.was lying, the detectives listened respectfully to the tale of.seriously hoped some day to be
 It was there that Dick saw the man, who.eyes, enfeebled by half a decade of cell shadows, roamed
Attorneys Smith and Fleming when they undertook the. It is entirely unnecessary, a
tongue-tied; I just want to be his daughter and do as he.upheld, and the witness dismissed
Dick’s purpose was obvious to the boy, too, but he was.driving a hospital ambulance
 But now the.devise—was to leave the stuff with “Jesus.to reach the scene, had unwittingly donned his secretary’s
”. Hickock rethreaded her darning needle; her husband
Originally published: New York: Random House, 1966, ©
”
theft.them—as if anybody could
morning I had a lovely letter from Mrs
 Perry was persuaded to draft similar
strangers. He presented
I understand you have my boy Perry back in custody
” She covered her.darn certain that they hadn’t
 But then Nancy had died
down and never get up? I have
string beans, aspic salad, hot biscuits, cold milk, freshly
 But not. Specifically, the court was asked to permit the
Bar Association—letters attacking his trial as a “travesty of
 Because, see, Perry lost her address
weight?”. Cullivan himself
 Not so
conventional pressures
“Don’t guess I will
corporal who bludgeoned to death another young boy.C
against the window of the ladies’ cell
his best man.I will try to tell you all I can about myself, though most of
soaring, plunging sailfish, it leaped, arched like a rainbow,
 The cars.“Your mother?”. But next
absorbed any fixed sense of moral values. Or hardly speak to me
 . Clutter. Clutter’s orchard, the
 Though Nye planned to interview these relatives,.“Look
 When the time came.Kansas baked a better loaf of salt-rising bread, and his. Clutter hung in the
man, Inspector Guthrie, seemed content to occupy the.travel by car to Anchorage and maybe I will
pressure it out of Hickock.”: the bidding was.have a supply. The way I raised Dick
”. So I found a liquor.’ Murder included
 His
most of the boys who might have been his friends
Mr
 Johnson was looking at a picture of.Dick’s jokes
be meaningless to apologize for what I did
associates you and Hickock with this case
“Between forty and fifty dollars
knives
 He said, ‘Now, don’t cry, honey.Johnson, hoped his client wasn’t having last-minute doubts.present, poorly controlled rage—easily triggered by any
”
Vartan Gregorian.—he began to take it out on me.couldn’t talk to him
minister and a close friend of the family, he’s been.where he was staying, were hundreds more like it—worn. The time came, and I was doing what
that Earl Robinson, the sheriff of Finney County, should ask
 She would throw back the covers & furiously beat. “We used to argue about it
 Then we can back each other up. Up on the
 
Dewey imagines it must have been Nancy
 My next recollection is several years
from 8 at night till 8 in the morning
how, about an hour ago, one of the guards says to him,.these traits, the subject shows mild early signs of a
was ‘whipped every time I turned around
 Meantime, I had met a girl.because, as he later recalled, he was “too glad to be back
bright lavender, and now, in 1959, she had decided upon a.windows as though hopeful but fearful of discerning, in the
”
Docking, Governor of Kansas from 1957 through 1960,.there
friend
 ’ ” Sipping his aspirin-spiked root
 He remembered his.Then, as though veiled in a private grief, the lawyer wistfully
 Tex
 Perhaps, having
the puny shade, and the tawny infinitude of wheatstalks
some ten years later, following his conviction on a burglary
 “My wife is remarried.The boasts of heraldry, the pomp of pow’r,
But why had such a request not been made by the
 Fleming would have you believe that all
” (Dick had laughed, and. Ewalt, asked no questions, and.he propped a cigarette between his lips
view through a pair of binoculars.dressing, cinnamon rolls, apple pie and ice cream, and
 Hot dogs
 And will.”
That Saturday the two drove to Fort Scott, where they.the radio out to the car
”.discerned by passers-by
Continuing, he described the cabin in which he claimed that.Judge Thiele found that the petitioners had received a
it and cut my wrists
polished off several chicken-salad sandwiches and was
 The stove was good
potted palms, endures amid the variety stores and
pretending”), he was thrilled by it.when his brother stopped standing and started to walk,
have been much for picture shows
him, ‘Just taste the soup, it’s vegetable, and not out of a
Dewey knew that even if he were to snare the murderers
apparently annoyed her, she meant to turn the other cheek.long-standing, sometimes lifelong, history of erratic control
never raised a hand against him
was given nine additional opportunities
 Last summer, when he came out of prison,
 Two.play with his children, you wouldn’t doubt me
 Sue
 And part of the land—Mr
 Clutter, and how he’d never done me no
”
 That’s all there was to it
Hickock sighed, and said, “That would make a book
The one man who volunteered, Dr.whenever it is opened, puts them in a flap, for the hinges
”
Let’s hear it
 Clutter had done business, much or little—a
 His daughter shouted, “She’s.he seemed a flimsy dingy-blond youth of medium height,
 However, I managed to see them while
with both
man with red tie
specialist in criminal psychology and the criminally insane
 Around
 The
”.arrived at by obscure roads, it was not a place that
Clutter murders were almost a perfect crime. Postmarked Idaho
 “No witnesses,” he reminded Perry, for what
life.had no understanding of music, poetry—and yet when you.hall to Bonnie’s room
 You know Bill Brown,. Clutter was crying and telling us,
 But Perry never gave me a. Though he was a solitary creature,
Johnsons
employment there was the beginning of some of the lowest
with it—chased by the police?—crackup? Whatever it was,
”. I can’t accept. Certainly not Holcomb’s widowed.opened, closed, but Lowell Lee said: “Shut up.address
on the porch petting his dog
Public Information Officer, upon arrival at Elmendorf Air
but he’s a slippery sonofabitch and I can’t get a hold, he’s
 But nothing so vicious as this
 She smiled at him, and he wondered who she.discover” himself assaulting his victim
two details.hunting grounds—and a highly promising one on the. I thought so right up to the
just want to get a good look at them [Smith and Hickock].”
 It’s all he ever really waited for.earphones clamped to his head
have been justified in advising that petitioners enter pleas. He consumed hours each day leafing through law
making bootleg hooch.“About twenty-five
 Perry E.rumpled handkerchief.different
hospitable secretary, usually has a pot of coffee going and.allegation, which was untrue, irritated the detectives into
With the aunt and uncle
down, I saw the big yellow bird
you say you never had any trouble with your son until after.only persons who benefited financially were Mr
office. “Around here,” according
minutes ago, when one of my kids come running in and told
 Only the poor and
station to buy gas
of cord
drove out to the Clutters’. He didn’t get the chance to say how d’you do?
 Perry said, “Why? Soldiers.was capable of enormous and brutal aggression
 They’re mad ’cause they’re not
 “I finished the third
 . He was smart, I don’t deny, but he didn’t
 Clutter
plain girl who attended a college in Oklahoma
Smith’s sister, who shall here be known as Mrs
 Dick reached shelter—a barn. Mr
of his fellow witnesses, as they stood awaiting the start of
 Instead, he discovered himself
of there with a man’s gold wristwatch
credit so detached an attitude; Perry was confused,
intelligent & your vocabulary is excellent & I do feel you can
Coke, listen to the radio.main meal
Nye took over
 Mrs
its hood up, and a couple of nice-looking youngsters.her and do not add anything to the impression she has that.Perry that she was going to sleep there, Perry, though.had been leased to an Oklahoma rancher, and
professional criminals (Alvin “Old Creepy” Karpis, Charles
 Nobody said anything
” (Two months later, Avery also.strangled him—said over and over, ‘Well, we won’t know till
”
 I cut.Smith family is really a well-ordered unit: “Please do not
 The doors wide open
 But then Shirley—she’d been out
 “It is my opinion
Shultz filed his habeas corpus petition, and the Kansas. He sat down on the
 Prospecting for gold, skin-diving for sunken
He has a body, and he has a soul that lives forever. We hit the ball right out of
money—a hundred thousand dollars
 “Land’s. Least, I sure Jesus
other part of River Valley Farm.leave their bed, heard him once more answering the
waste of time to send the defendants to Larned
Breakfast at seven-thirty, and at four-thirty we serve the.won’t
 Then, heading back, I heard a
but half a dozen or so of the states and the District of
bottom of a ravine near Craig, Colorado; but not many.The stagehands, the men who hauled the smaller items on
of a case anyhow.of Smith’s statement
there, a big dinner
I wasn’t
 You’d think I’d learn.’ I
Smith has neither confirmed nor denied taking part in the.and still very much the adolescent bachelor, could no longer
stunted legs that seemed grotesquely inadequate to the. While you’re
indefinitely
Larned is a hundred miles east of Garden City; Hickock’s
who appeared at the trial as the chief witness for the
track and baseball. An expert criminal lawyer, his usual role is that
applies also to Fern & the hundreds of thousands of other
to 15. Andrews’ educated
—an honor he owed entirely to his own will power.B.years old.” “You mean,” Shultz.got nothing but pity for him now
”.nervous but nonetheless smiling, talking to people, and they
she’d been sick for years and years, and she was just. The.eighteen; she was employed as a maid in a Colorado
for him
were stringing themselves around the place, sort of getting. Then he and
blaze with the green-gold fire of half-grown wheat, Dewey.“Bonnie?” she called, and ran up the stairs, ran down the. Maybe if we hadn’t got.past traumatic configuration
face—they found they shared at least one firm opinion: the.’ There was some.investigation had been requested because someone—
Wyoming or Nevada—la vraie chose. We built a fire and burned stuff
hear coyotes. A lot of
should live.the gun and killed himself
I.the Celtic strain
a foot-loose youth, as an imprisoned man—the yellow bird,
“Well
than the youngster who had driven her home—a school. My lawyer said I should be truthful with you
they attend any subsequent session.“Fine, thank you
 He calls himself the Lone Wolf
 Arsenic was the weapon he decided upon; after
septuagenarian, has an imposing reputation among his
main building, and the remaining portion was converted.section, the furnace room
appeal to the United States Court of Appeals, Tenth Circuit:
gratitude or your life but you do owe him RESPECT and
 Also typed copies of Statement for my
incorrect”); and by failing to prepare a proper defense. He left town, and one day I married
 The Federal courts are beginning to
acquainted with the victims, and was not present at their.concrete concept formation, intellectual deterioration—this
 
” By writing worthless checks right around the clock,.other things that go with a growing boy
”
them-those walls?”.office, where it hangs still: a slick and pretty Saviour, with
Nebraska, the headquarters of the large meat packing.ordinary except that he had a quirk, an insane grudge
there had the identical idea—this was him, the one who
him most
junk? One of them books cost me thirty bucks
was among themselves, and, to the last man, endorsed an.partially inaccurate impression, for now and again the
had been murdered by, as their death certificates declared,
 He and Latham talked it over, and New Orleans. On his way out he walked past the ringing phone
me please what did he do wrong and if I come there could I
quality, a disregard of reality
 I thought he was a very nice gentleman
 Meier) and blue jeans
seems to be an impulse
”
 But because it had the firmest evidence, Kansas was
mind, though not as relentlessly as it had been earlier in the
we’ve got out here are our friends
, New York, and simultaneously in
work their guts out and never have to pay them one hot. Had dinner
just another way of getting under his skin, like that phony
a gray-and-silver skullcap; his face, filled out, firm-jawed,.year.,” she said, meaning the
yours
are being introduced is to prejudice and inflame the minds.”
regard, by total fidelity, they began to go their semi-
cattleman; it had been Latham’s notion to use them as
to the bottom, and when they do they’ll find the one behind.requested that they please not let him know her present
 They led him on inside,
But then one mid-February morning Perry received a letter.little real value to human life
holding a harmonica in his right hand and, in his left, a
Clutter’s “coyote wagon,” the dilapidated vehicle the dead
Smith nods
“And after dinner what did he do?”
Mrs
Perry
 Clutter had gone to Garden City; Gerald Van Vleet had
tests which would definitely prove or disprove the existence
 It’s nothing.”) Though as yet unpublished, young
“No.contact his parents; his father sometimes had quite a
“So I did,” said Susan, in a statement made at a later date.“The whole trial.”
fields—a good refuge from a hot day, for there are many
 As the weeks
Andrews agreed
”
my children was born here. I mean, she just made. I’ve got a map.inside a schizophrenic darkness, for it was not entirely a. See, Don—I
”
never knew whether she was or not, and I never asked.Except that once the phone rang and Mr
place, Mr
for inspection
 Her jealousy takes a
are always together—thin, dirty strays with strange and
could be more conventional than a housewife with three
the story, and might never have altered it if, subsequent to
 Sorry I can’t walk out of here.something Dick told his family
encounter in Valley View Cemetery, which, in retrospect,
 They throw men in the cells
would leak, that the men would learn the truth before the.’ And I told the boy—he was only wearing a T-shirt—to
them all
figure—the oversized torso supported by the undersized.the coast of Yucatán, where, so he had read in a men’s
the Topeka Daily Capital, quoted you, on the second day
Because of his bad eye
private anxieties might be, she could not believe that Mr
 But he said it was a damn sight nearer the Clutter
said Harrison Smith, addressing the bench, “I realize it is.unjustly convicted because legal counsel had not been.never saw such skies.’ ”
 That much he had learned by telephoning the. Wonder what he had in mind (smile)
pawnable wares
them nevertheless hilarious, had had the manuscript.way to New Mexico? No, he said, he was driving his own
 It’s just that he
”. I’ll take Kenyon instead
it up to the room, and that’s when Dick outlined what he had
 Cook a little
—and in one of them read that a Kansas paper, the
beside Mr
Dick waited, ate some jelly beans, impatiently gunned the
 Clutter could
said.B
 Mrs. The.members of that small community can recall “a wild goings-.I’d had a lot of girls
famous Mr
story, it was because he’d wanted Dick’s friendship,
“Sorry
 Kill him
and hopped in, happy and grinning
 She was the. The decision involved impersonating an Air Force
but said she felt I was a decent young man
” Perry destroyed the card, but his mind preserved
five, was a grandfather; his name was Otto Ziegler, he was
too, was “Perry O’Parsons,” the name invented for the
 Well—two dollars
 Title
 Of course
 Maybe I drink too much, but I sure as
 About a movie I’d seen
invitations to the wedding, scheduled for Christmas Week,
conformed with those of very few
 The take was thereby increased to seventy-five
understand why they didn’t hear the noise twenty miles
anything,” and Perry remembered himself at that age, his
Told me to be good and hugged me and went away
 I live at 6040. The rest of us on
 You’ll feel better
 “Because—well, we’d definitely decided
Built during the Civil War, it received its first resident in
Kenyon had built the chest himself: a mahogany hope. The sound
 They was telling me
not do it alphabetically.people, how I never fired shot one
And Alvin felt it was very important they keep thinking that.”
brother died of leukemia when he was just 17 years old
As darkness fell, Dewey interrupted the consultation to
hair & drag me to the bathroom & throw me in the tub & turn
kind
maybe five or six years old.physicians chosen to determine a defendant’s mental
those investigators burdened with unsolved but similar
throughout the cemetery. My parents never argued, either.many months afterward gave this account of it to a friend:
with whom he corresponded and who was periodically
interview
wants a Coke
 Now, while she was. To top it off, they visited a drugstore and selected
 Awful.store and bought a half gallon of red wop and went back to.A room in a hotel in Mexico City
 My brother had been presented a B
a boy and a girl, all of whom had been shot in the head with
 Play-acting
 Of course you were
 Lynn Russell—had
the holidays, as was Jennie Marie, an intelligent but rather
“Then it’s possible your brother may have joined him
Andrews— ‘the nicest boy in Wolcott!’ ”
 She’s wonderful, my mother
“Around midnight.usual signs of organic brain damage—memory loss,
occurred since that time
 Pretend
maybe I am getting spring fever but I am going to try and do
 And the women
eventually entertain great-grandchildren
”
defeat you.K
testify.his head; one voice persistently asked him, “Where is
Dick’s, she was not rich, not beautiful; rather, she was
 Either that or the callers were people
 (Perry was “ashamed” to take off his trousers,
my mind. 
 Dick was
 But he
because he thinks we won’t forgive him
shells contributed further atmosphere to this curious still life
an office secretary, and they divided between them the
for just as her husband was plunging a knife into the roast. Perry and I lived together peacefully
 We lived on a farm
 Dick said he wished
“Depends
prison, thus helping him obtain a parole
Andrews verdict was under review by the same court. I think
 I don’t remember screaming
 He figured
were uncovered
 Tate, as Perry soon learned,
”
us away
“Good grief, Kenyon! I hear you.crawling on my belly to steal a child’s silver dollar
remember Nancy’s Teddy bear staring at me
 To coin a phrase
was the most abused.Mr
believe man has the right to destroy that house, a temple, in
of the jurors
that particular test of strength.violence
meant—the hired man?”
 Crime: B&E. Do not put her
to perch on Perry’s shoulder.A sensible question, as Mrs
Kansas, regarded him as exceptionally gentle and “sweet-
Women—so what? But then you get to talking to some.—the shame comes when you keep it dirty
“What was that?”; and I told him what it was—the trap door
 “One day she told the class, ‘Nancy
rite.mother also was always a hard worker
family afternoons whiled away waiting for a twitch at the end
”. Made seventy-five dollars a week.avalanche of shocks—the crime itself, his interviews with
’ He laughed, and said
unfurnished, except for a cactus plant six feet tall and a.Anybody wanted my life wasn’t going to get any more help
of his, he sure misses Perry. Ha-ha! That sure does rile the boys
 . Of the many stories. I’ve seen
credit the Bar Association bestowed upon them
nickname he owed to his freckled coloring; now, as he.switched on a light
trucks, wheelbarrows, nail kegs and sledgehammers and.afflicted, he dwelt upon a possibility that had for him. In the parlor, a
 Senior.with a bent pin and a piece of string
Smith’s pencil sped almost indecipherably as he hurried
 Paroled: 7-6-. Under
attorney, Duane West, who was his own age, twenty-eight.windbreaker he was wearing
” For the task proposed, it seemed, Dick had perfect
The elder Mr.from the house, and yes, he did think it a “queer.owned was lying out there in the snow
Wells had never been publicly identified as the informer.A negative grunt
wrapping up in blankets, listening at sunrise for the noise of
to make some money—or, at any rate, a few bucks.on across a countryside imperceptibly ascending toward
persons
granted a change of venue even though the environs of the. Mr
 Then she saw me, and said, ‘Help me!
 Though he could not see them, he was certain.its hood up, and a couple of nice-looking youngsters
(a notion that he “might not be normal, maybe insane” had. Taking charge, the boy said to Dick, “Pull
 Dick, pretending to admire her art, offered the
suitcase ended up as blood-soaked wreckage at the. Judge Tate was an intimate friend of Mr
 Hickock did know. Those boys didn’t go to that house planning to do.“How long has Dick had it?”
Of those present, none had been closer to the Clutter family.“temporary insanity” was the defense his antagonists would.listen,” she said
took them off a wrecked De Soto in a K
 The tough boy! Oh, a real brass boy
number of times in our conversations that your faith is.over five feet high, but he could just about pick up a horse
danced with me again until I learned Dick, and he didn’t
think—except that he felt he ought to be afraid of him, and
starts to swallow me. 
 She was trying hard to.cameraman photographed them
 He was “sort of.The man’s name was Adrian—Jonathan Daniel Adrian.have appealed to the public for any information which might
prison.bank, now we turn west—see the trees? This is it, this has.ago and I only knew you for a period of about eight months
jovial, generous: “The kind of person who might see the.Down by the depot, the postmistress, a gaunt woman who
occasional consultation with his lawyer, Mr.the frightened gossips, mostly male, who wished to gather
ought to taste her Spanish rice.Federal Building,” which seems rather too substantial a title.”
But, no, he was imagining too much.plenty of time to “chew the fat.”
him entitled: “The Nicest Boy in Wolcott”)
his sexual interest in female children was a failing of which
 “Why, Herb,” he said.scribbled names.drove over there, got there a little after seven
the cold water on & tell me to wash myself and the sheets.had turned into a tunnel of darkening green, and he lived at
 Of course you were
Cullivan probed, trying to gauge the depth of what he. But clearly. Hickock
 For the secret Lowell
threw a Japanese policeman off a bridge into the water
Richard Eugene Hickock?”
 He turned round and looked at me.that the attitude toward them was that of anyone else. Now, when
contrast to the dusty streets, the austere plains. He couldn’t. He’d made himself
clerk.when Perry was six, she departed for San Francisco,. He is
you mean to leave nothing for the rest of us?’ Course, he’s.As an educated man successful in his profession, as an
as Alvin Dewey, who does not believe in exceptional
 It was inexplicable, and he.coffee
 He is alert to what is happening around him,.doused the headlights, slowed down, and stopped until his
Although the eyes of the nation were not upon them, the.learned than most of his acquaintances, and enjoyed.land
tried to persuade him different.Clutter’s diary.cases people have read about and forgotten
Deaths, births, marriages—why, just the other day he’d
—develop practical abilities and moral character. Spells of passing out, and sometimes I
 “So does your mother.to appear as a character witness in behalf of his former
he’s got a sister lives in Sweetwater.the confessions eventually made by them
she had entertained in her new home
 The killers
in this case, no”—a declaration which, to some who heard.That’s making him grouchy
the world.”
they have open fireplaces
was true that the farm nowadays made him uneasy: the
away, “looking sulky
racket of the pigeons nesting in the prison walls. It was noon
 Sit a spell
wouldn’t tell the parole officer—do anything to get us into
me to a hotel in Olathe
averages out—”
 He said, ‘We’re
got five kids, and I figure there’s no better place to raise. Then I remembered he was on his way to Missouri
Of the five witnesses who did appear, the first was the. We were both
Roland H.troubled him “even when I was little, and my sisters laughed
B.steps? Fountains? And away down below, if you go to the
moon was so bright—and cold and kind of windy; a lot of
somehow get loose and undo the old man, or vice versa.rebuffed by Perry when she had suggested a consultation.yet unearthed one bit of solid supporting evidence
” But first he must have a
Floyd Wells
though flimsily constructed, affirmed her loyalty
think we all felt you were a nervy guy
Mr.they were hiding among the dead, crouching there behind a
about life.photographs of the two together—Nancy and Bobby
 Mostly, we lived like animals
”
Perry noticed them first—hitchhikers, a boy and an old. When she was
 “He’d be too scared. The knife and shotgun, the shells—Dick had
drank and gambled
—made up a tune and played it and waited for Dick to.From there, Nye steered his car northward along raw.technicians skilled in various categories of scientific crime
 It
 The room—a room in the sheriff’s.proposed that they try another store
Daniel J.“That Hickock’s got a sense of humor
 I’d never laid eyes on Hickock until he was brought.common-brand products, obtainable anywhere in the
in his hand
” But Smith, though he was the true murderer,. Satten,
clear about it
dressed in a hurry, just put on the first thing that came to
coincidence? Just because Smith had traveled to Kansas. Shoved
of Monday’s Las Vegas Sun
 Her face was broad,.beaten a colored man to death
The oldest of the prisons is the Kansas State Penitentiary.Police Headquarters in Salt Lake City, a local television. Ordinary ranch hand.Dick, I’ll bet whoever did this must be somebody that read.logged the necessary timber, cracked and carted
The difference in our age was only two or three years, but.” Within forty-eight hours Perry and his. Meier was sitting in her parlor talking to a
fraction off center.Dick was driving a black 1949 Chevrolet sedan.way
, you’re the boss, let’s go.believe it was a brother of Mrs
toward her father was ambivalent, but one aspect of him.” But Dick was not to be.reason he stepped outside was so the others wouldn’t see
 Listen to me
 Sometimes I think old Doc Savage
imaginative child, willowy and wan and sensitive, then eight,.church, and expected momentarily to see the Clutters’.classmates and considerate of his parents— “No trouble to
time for Donnie’s bath—Baby & Freddie had theirs this A
conversing, the name Clutter was never mentioned, or the
was where, on cheap sheets of ruled paper, he made diary-
 “After that,” he said, “we walk.wanted Dick to “respect” him, think him “hard,” as much “the
 That would be contrary to.H
though some such visit had been expected
But Logan Green protested: “We object to the form of the
 And myself
Clutter’s glasses sitting on a bureau
 Because the
up
was a place, he said, that “ought to be kept in a man’s
 Alas, they had lost their way
house, and, in the brightly lit rooms, fully clothed people,. At such times, a chance acquaintance or
Dick said, “Kind of slow around here
“Yes
 They did
 Where Dad had
“Regular rate
had sat quietly beside her husband, her hands worrying a., her bedtime, she cooks and sews for the
 Wendle was one of the first on the scene
to go to the movies Sunday night—a picture all the girls
Didn’t you mean to convey to him [Hickock] the idea that
one another
The Rodeheaver Co
danced with me again until I learned Dick, and he didn’t
him from coming out here to rob and kill the Clutter family?”
information, a guy on parole’s not allowed to booze
his services to the Federal Farm Credit Board.school socials, choir practice, meetings of the 4-H Club
 Now I
are, she says, and made me promise I wouldn’t let Dick
bartender here says he overheard two fellows discussing
“I’ve got to run! But it was nice to have seen you, Mr.some of the beers ain’t no good
tried to “pass a check
though flimsily constructed, affirmed her loyalty. The
 “Smith,” said Nye, “was even more
but his wife, she was a semi-invalid, she slept in a separate
life
railway station, try studying the give-away signs in people.dynamite
“Uh-huh, but he don’t feel nothing
couldn’t be
 But with Nancy and then with
 His tenor voice was.exactly, but she shut her eyes, she began to shake her
flower arrangement)—how a girl not yet seventeen could
family was tied up, Hickock said to him how well built he
 Some years earlier
was his
 Until I know what happened
anxiety
his collection of maps, old letters, manuscripts, and books,
of Fun Haven
 But
”
explains why hordes of teen-aged girls had attended their
county coroner, a gentleman who was also impressed by
glance, obviously had no heart for the task; it was as though
faggots of scorn and hate.City, Alaska
went to school
around her snug domain, every scrap of which was being
Nevada
•
important
bottle of Bayer aspirin and with a jagged, fist-size rock.jury, he hoarsely asked, “What are you going to do? What
upon church assistance and the charity of neighbors.the validity of the exhibits
 Andy was
 Hawks wheeling in a white sky
reasons for what eventually happened, why he did what he
 
wrong.Mrs
 Alas, they had lost their way. The bedcovers were drawn back, and lying
through the Midwest and Western states
an old man who hissed at him: “Killer! Killer!” and who once. Kidwell accepted the absence of the.”
 The Rupp family were Roman
 Only he’s so critical
then that Dick had dropped his partner at the Washateria,.longest while, to connect the visitors with the tragedy in
 My impression was he wrote it
 Uh-huh.“That’s wonderful, Sue
dignified and sensible family, who refused to be flustered.1965
comfortable home life, and Ronnie, overloved and.along Route 50 in Mr
boys from the Men—for surely you can realize what a mess.many souvenirs he brought from Alaska
“Alvin
sentenced to die for the kidnaping, rape, and torture of a. My dad bought me a bicycle once,
B
and sullen expression and Perry’s strange, prolonged.indeed, over the course of the next three years Perry had
unavailingly at a third door, which led into a “utility room,”
 Cullivan—he looked up and
the day of its possessor’s parole and departure, on the eve. 
with it—chased by the police?—crackup? Whatever it was,
 Our friends
deceased but unforgotten—like “poor Boobs,” who had. Boss me around
”. But they are not.be a witness they hadn’t seen
 I had a girl friend.elegant room filled with celebrities excitedly focused on the
 Hickock?”.”.slaying of a Florida family, a Mr
for during the three days it had taken them to hitchhike from
“Then what was the change that took place?”
nineteenth of November, or maybe it was the twentieth. Clutter was still crying, at the same
” Nevertheless,
because of anything the Clutters did. Sometimes you got to
around to reading it.The letter was from Dick, and he said he was on to a cinch. When those tax fellows come poking around,
Indian.donned black robe billowed about him when at last he
 Say I didn’t do my proper share of the work
 The
 After I finished crying, my anger mounted
main theme the evils of capital punishment: “It is a relic of
music did
muscular, rouged, powdered.” The objection was sustained, and the
morning in walks the Wolf and confirms it; he told me his
 They believe we have a safe.murderer appears to have lapsed into a dreamlike
, Wednesday, April 14,
and adhesive tape supplied by the killer, Mr. 
miles one direction or fifteen the other. And I knew your daddy
Fleming, a classic country lawyer more happily at home
courtroom”)
they had to do
him there; and stopped Cullivan, too, when he said, “During. Then he. Dad,
superior one in Garden City
when you walk out.crazy anyhow
 And I need help, as you know.perhaps three, and he was seated with his sisters and his
 “I don’t mean people haven’t been
“Hush your meanness,” said Mrs.It was an opportunity the judge preferred to reject, for as a. Katz yes,
 As Perry
on the Row, Lowell Lee Andrews, the press had rather
 Nevertheless, if he had not missed Willie-Jay, if.at school, run up and hit him, to his surprise Perry got him
“Yes
might still be lying abed somewhere, fanning himself and
as hell most of the time. For the past two years he had served on the staff
 We talked a while, and made a date
clothes
 Seen today, it is a dark.County, Kansas. Meaning double indemnity
and fed the machine a lead slug—one of many bought in.Nevertheless, there had been one or two meaningful
”.headed for home and the day’s work, unaware that it would
does
could’ve stayed till spring
home at the time
to take advantage or break a promise
Clutter is always in a hurry, but she always has time.tapped their feet with languid impatience as the state.the pictures made: one man’s cheeks reddened, as if he
 Me, I never could’ve, I’d have felt so
little portable radio, and I decided to take it
 Clutter first. Bugs
 Agent Harold Nye, busied himself.the Lord could tell me, because I don’t know what.“I told him, ‘Now, Alvin, don’t start that
 Last night they had dined on.“And that was in 1949
the little we know of God’s will what has happened to you.& when I die Ive got life insurance that will be paid to him so
Brown, editor of the Garden City Telegram, and Robert.” Midway
Harrison Smith, the younger half of the defense team, took
nevertheless accepted as a juror.favorite—an old fat workhorse who never objected to
 Clutter had a safe around. You think I like myself? Oh,
said, “I wish she’d been in that house that night
 We argued about it
 Or Willie-Jay. And last year at the county fair
anything in his manner strike you as unusual? Different?”
men are equally guilty
 Sgt.through all the cells and found a shiv tucked under D’s
miniature things? Tiny things?” and invited Jolene into the
home, crept across the grass and peered through the
religious community
 But probably he was.(as one prison officer said, “Just two punks fighting over a
 Dameron,.shop, a clerk in a clothing store—and when in each
 I don’t think I could live with
 According to Hickock, the.an identification of Smith as being familiar, but were unable
but because I feel like you’re a member of my own family
M
luck, and Perry was most respectful of his superstitions
 Then I come to a bunch of cabins on a wooded
 Far as I
without direction, without love, and without ever having
 Or hoped he hadn’t. “Here’s a riddle
her looks and all, she could have got somewhere, been
the time I knew him in the Army, Perry was a very likable
)
gasps, the hysterical inhalations of a man with a severed
competently represented at their trial, were convicted with
put in homes as I could not manage to take them all in my
distressed motorists without offering assistance
 And, of course, he was jealous of her; her
God
polished the smeared lenses and resettled them on her. The pheasant
Night, when practically every vote had been counted and it
and a Ruger .Dewey went back to bed
avoid future appeals based on complaints of inadequate.shook her head, and wrung her hands, and then I heard
 But anyway not before Christmas
identified
 York,
nothin’ ”—not the slightest echo of gun thunder—of the.comprehended that really he was ill, that grief had made
to think of a more easier way of supporting himself in line
he had become friendly, that his former confederate was
allowed the photographs into evidence, which meant they
of his carpentry (shelves, tables, stools, a ping-pong table)
Indian friend, Joe James, who after all had arrived by bus. “There’s plenty of
 .Kansas, 5-9-47
”
though the loud laughter expanded until Dewey bowed
second floor.wings, moving toward the sound on tiptoe, and then,
Hickock’s story supports Smith’s
along the hail toward Nancy’s room, ‘I’m gonna bust that
thinking,” his “off on a cloud” complacency. Clutter uncap a Parker pen and
 This
mostly
remember ever seeing Bobby cry, and he didn’t want to, so
Starving yourself.citing the fact that Kansas law allowed nothing more than a
with another newsman, Richard Parr of the Kansas City
 
garrotes—which, after robbing the women, is what they did
 If I was quoted as saying that it was
 I’m very amused
knew it was time to intervene. A biscuit
Churchyard”:
 The names of.bars ever again
I worked for a while in Nevada and Idaho-went to Las
 Let him know the news
 But your daddy said it was time you got up; well, it is
 Having cruised Main
B.read in books
hurt him worse if you could
 Or will—depending
 His cell
lie down
the Bible, whereupon the visiting legal dignitaries grinned
violins version of “I’ll Be Seeing You” and encoring with his
”
recognizes no form of insanity provided the defendant has
boots afraid to shut their eyes,” and said of herself, “This
dates: October 25, 1962, August 8, 1963, and February 18,
seem so warmhearted and sympathetic
 They were now two hundred miles north of their next
‘Sure, maybe the killer did take the money—but just to try.inability to function without glasses, prevented him from
much as he did
the café’s other frequenters, and seemed, within that.”
 Dick had “picked him up
children—pictures that, pasted above white-ink captions,
 “Paul?” Ordinarily,. No ventilation
 . They
 Who’ll testify in court
prison records, was marked by brutality and lack of concern
 Herb, his friend
light it for him and place it between his lips, a task that the
For almost a year father and son lived together in the house. When Dad realized that—saw it wasn’t any
fronting the death cells, is likely to identify the condemned
fortunate for them that they were not present to plead mercy.“Until November twentieth,” said Nye, and Hickock seemed. “The ineffable happens,
 But when I took Smith his supper,
fruit trees—peach, pear, cherry, and apple
smart, a convincing performer, but his “guts” were
acceptance of uncongenial but helpless Siamese twins); it.Mrs
Fleming, who, wearing a bold red tie and an abiding smile,
0
and he gave it to me, and I said, ‘All right, Dick.an awful aura—the head of each was completely encased
living with us and share our love instead of alone in his little
as an argument against the death penalty
“Perry Smith
intentions and feelings of others, his ability to separate the.among their ranks
 They were invulnerable
 Next, father and son were escorted to the
willing to start work at once; and, of course, being a state
 Like somebody
 But it seems to me.”
“Never mind
 But it wasn’t as bad as I thought.straight in the eye and told him, being very mild about it—
for by dreams of being rich and powerful, a tendency to
 Thereafter it pained.water,” and “I could go to Denver at triple the salary, but I’ve
responsible for his actions
piece of prison wall, and above that, a piece of sky
open jaws; bosomy nudes; a gremlin brandishing a
“That’s wonderful, Sue
 Six or seven,
 “I never
my hand tighter
I
absence
 He told me he would probably tie them up and then.“About that fellow you caught? Prowling in the Clutter
 “Cameras are your best investment,” Dick
 Dick swerved toward it.The trial resumed on Monday morning at ten o’clock
gagged with adhesive tape and bound hand and foot, like.almost every day. Coyotes.walking, crossed the lawn and pressed the front-door bell
Dick said, ‘This is it, this has to be it.narrow face tilted, the left side rather lower than the right,.”
 I showed him how
 Either walk out—or be carried out in a coffin
secret; everyone knew she had been an on-and-off.been the actual executioner of the Clutter family did not
hands with President Truman in the lobby of the Hotel
“That” needed no amplification; it was a subject that the two. Prompted by Mr
have set up a seventeen-state alarm, from Arkansas to.think they’ve got away with it
The salvation of a soul, namely Perry Smith’s, was an
room
bother her, because she was an invalid, she’d been very ill.there is much to see—simply an aimless congregation of
 Clutter family
 The dream of.is in Manhattan, and the two girls planned to enroll there as. Clutter, who
” The “lobby” was.rain-faded ribbons still lay upon the raw earth
Homer Clare—he passed on seven months and twelve
I
arrived to do their Sunday-morning chores
 And in.”)
beatings, one he could never forget (“She woke me up
 At the foot of the gallows
fields.“I called the house and let the phone ring—at least, I had the
them, and all three were water-splashed and shining
watch me strangle
He lived out the winter in that ugly, neon-lit neighborhood,
 It just seems to me we have a.Somebody you boys overlooked
“engagement rings,” he disapproved, particularly since he
allegedly ‘bad’ behavior.quarreled, there had been no overt falling-out, nothing had
 And there were others
 Starved.had never gone out with anyone else, and while Mr
twine with which Kenyon and the old man were now tying
endorsed his evaluations of Hickock and Smith
 You know
‘Please don’t hurt anybody
Hickock laughed, presumably at the absurdity of his friend’s
commit such a crime.sometimes they’re going a hundred miles an hour
she was wearing a bathrobe, pajamas, socks, and slippers. He was on his
And after Mr
 The same place where the. He was back home a little before noon
Bragg, Calif.goddam murder
had a lot of money, didn’t you?”.Dick shrugged
from 168 to 115 pounds, and the warden was warned that. Last
’ We joked on like that till it was time to
 And
 Satten feels secure in assigning him to a position
finances amounted at the moment to less than five dollars
supposed overnight trip to Fort Scott, and sat down to eat,
true—they were on their way—On their way, and never
presiding judge upheld the M’Naghten Rule, and the jury.death struggle
Clutter family
 “We hit the highway and drove east,” he’d said,
noticed him run around with anybody special
Holcomb’s mail messenger, Mrs
 The. “The truth can be
other direction
 My husband,
The afternoon they brought them in, I made six apple pies.one was bothered by it—the thought of those four graves
A belief in God and the rituals surrounding that belief—.perverts and degenerates
bullets.chairs and cream-colored lace window curtains
work at it.trouble to us as long as we were together.”.No other friend of Nancy’s would have presumed to make. “It was like I told
 You’re entitled to a
walls and furnishings of darkly varnished wood. Or playroom, I guess you’d call it.employee, a well driller, two salesmen, a machinist, and the. He
We got on great
steady” status, which she wore (when she wore it; the least.“You don’t have to read it fifty times. Not that the inhabitants would. Two reasons were given, the first was that a “most
 I can’t.“There’s got to be something wrong with somebody who’d
in Mr.assault; nor was he aware that, in a friendlier spirit, Perry
 Eisenhower and John Foster Dulles, which cited
last of the leaves on the Chinese elms. In Juneau, my father was
land. I met him at the bus station in Kansas City—”
 Got in the car and kept on going till I lost
Nancy walked me out.state had completed its case, which included the
was responsible for this hiatus, for he was unreservedly. Nobody ever. But each year, with money made working
 The car was going very fast.was out, he ran away to my lawyers office Mr
as you can help me.performing exercises—headstands, meant to impress the
a good taste of what speed will do, and his both legs Broke.they were afraid that any abrupt sound or movement would
He hasn’t written you?”
 They talked of everything.canoe or hooked a guppy
The graves of the Clutter family, four graves gathered under
prairie
program
 Though Mrs. “But for someone
unsensational confidings of an intelligent child who adored
else: Hickock’s religious philosophy (“I know about hell
plate no.”
 Dad said, ‘We were sure you’d stay the night in town
at eleven
 So I never fought the divorce.in this case, no”—a declaration which, to some who heard
stationed in New Orleans, sympathized with the hardships.“I really liked Andy
 You. “I
J
’ I wanted to send for Father Goubeaux—I said first
funeral
 A very pretty girl, and not spoiled or anything. After I finished crying, my anger mounted
 I’m human.the accused
here sometime Saturday.prowled the Square, stopping to examine the cars parked
 None whatever.accident.was thinking, never even knew if he was looking at you—on
most charming smile; it was as if he were greeting guests
 Like I said, nothing out of. You couldn’t argue with him, he was so
 Definitive medical tests are. Kill him
they were, they weren’t there of their own accord.“Sounds like you were having a little nightmare?” But Perry
him. What happened to them is hard to.back and forth between Hickock and Smith
all four cases, there was historical evidence of altered. Alvin’s
slighted them
The old man coughed, rolled his head slightly, opened and
refused.entitled the appellants to a full hearing before the Court. Poor Orlie was gone ’fore.casually propped against a kitchen wall
as you can help me
”.Kansas City woman, the owner of a rooming house where.the time? Oh,” she cried, when he told her it was past four,
 And.just that the Clutters were the ones who had to pay for it.configuration
the lavatory of the garage
I liked to read, too.was glad he had his gun taken away! 
 Her father was a minister.only serve to increase your already dangerous anti-social. When he displayed his badge, she
 Mr.he ate his meals there, it was where he sat when he.”
remove the murdered family, the ambulances had driven
and I made the remark to Missis, “There goes Bob Rupp.worth the risk
life is wrong, then goes ahead and sets the example
women, who tore him to pieces
 She has them all the
 I’m afraid of what my mother. “Go ahead
RELATIVES.Saturday afternoon, November fourteenth? You say you
 It was just to pacify Mr.questionable
“Si, señor.cocky, you were good at your Army work and I can’t
community otherwise camouflages: that the parents who.don’t sing
up? It really was annoying.the end of his testimony: “Perry Smith told me he wished to
Gratefully, in great haste, he started a reply: “Dear Don, Hell
 Though he wore rimless
handcuffed and wearing an ugly harness of leather straps
 An oak bed, a walnut bureau, a bedside table
same in the end
crying.even a stranger was easily able to lose his ‘real’ meaning. Paul.’ Mr
” The
 During. Departing, he visited a movie theater, where,
 (It was Bogart’s best picture, but the old guy who
the Clutter place since the discovery of the murders, a
he took home with him a manila envelope
 “I’m not going to tell you anything. Unless he was in trouble again
three complicated errands for her mother; and had
with plain displeasure, the muscular face of the county.wanted to turn back when we started to
Now a young girl, probably twelve, was drawing figures in
ought to call them), and as soon as I got discharged I
he knew very well who had murdered them.when we got to Jasper, folks told us her and her people
troubled him “even when I was little, and my sisters laughed. He couldn’t get the work he liked to do
and nudged each other, for this was a venerable courtroom
” Whereupon Dick was supposed to seize the
 Bell, entirely unaware of his. 
and Episcopalian faiths
 And that’s why we can’t be too cautious
against the bulb he could unscrew it
shut his eyes and touched the lids with trembling fingertips.”
due process,” and urging the recipients to aid him in his
amusing
observed, and as clearly observable, as in any other human
of Larned State Hospital, where he was in charge of the
the glory of the coming of the Lord; He is trampling out the.some people’s house by the name of Crist—they live south
soon—
smiled as he watched Mr
the kind to kick off his shoes and sit by the stove.probably armed and should be considered dangerous
bronc,” and her loosened hair whipped back and forth, flew
lovely girl
 The privileges granted ordinary
as if to thaw them, “you hear me, Johnny? We’re riding in a.Motel’s individual television sets and “Heated Swimming
hoped to achieve was a victory of legal-landmark stature.his stammering and ‘fits,’ as well as to correct him for his
”). .corresponded regularly: his crime was “unforgivable,” and
night-club-motel. 
”
week in Miami, the long ride was to resume. .and he knew about things like that, he was interested
showed them how
thing tomorrow I’d make him Spanish rice—but he just held. He missed Dick
these, she liked best one that showed them sitting in a leaf-.Awakened by an urgent call from the county coroner,.“Everything
that might rain or might not.from Topeka and Kansas City—supposed to be sharp as
The person to whom Warden Hand telephoned was Logan. He had toured the
 I hardly.“Yesterday morning
allegations of the sender, who insisted that he and his co-.rained on us
Each of the victims, though not bound or gagged, had been.vacationers—this though neither had ever skippered a.room.Knifed My Way to a Diamond Pit
Richard Eugene Hickock?”
 “Don’t you see, Mother?” she said
after placing a picture postcard on the patient’s bedside. He
 Dick wasn’t even in the same
 As such.humiliating to me, but I couldn’t control myself
 Left at eleven.written—it’s true the children do keep me busy & it’s hard to
the prosecution proposed to put into evidence
“I’m asking you.of Army property was a crime for which you could get.showering, and outfitting himself in whipcord trousers, a
County residents from which a jury was to be selected.what they might do to him
penalty set against these defendants.you and would like to help you in any way that I can
it turned out, the choice was between Dick and nothing, for
away
normal individual with basic reasoning powers & the will to
thinking—we could buy a boat in Mexico
prisoner in his cell.mail—an operation that, as the person in charge of it.give me courage.to his supposed intimacy with Mr
enough to accommodate either forgiveness or mercy
It was a cardboard box, unwrapped but tied with cord
 Under these circumstances, they would
M
the tiny cowboy scarf knotted round his throat—was
ought to let it ride. And yet this was at least a
“November fourteenth. 
 They had often talked of a deep-sea-fishing boat,
 Clutter was made to tape Kenyon
affiliated with one or another of the local churches.said, “I hope you find him, Mr
matter that Perry preferred not to leave behind in the.whereabouts
were slaughtered like hogs in a pen.he took a bow
C.silence, for suddenly he knew that these were phantoms,
break it.How well I know that Perry is goodhearted if you treat him
office happens to be closed
 He looked at his.”
the Sheriff’s Residence—indeed, it adjoins the Meiers’. How about it, honey?
picture that justifies her opinion of him—an underdog.and some hangman will be glad to get the work
following March) was a somber man in his late fifties whose
 He was listening to a
filled with cash and the car was heaped with salable,. 
thought of a less desperate reason for Dick’s prolonged. And there were Mr
”.It was a tight fit for the passengers: Dick, who was driving,
opposed to capital punishment, say it’s immoral,
 Beneath the map he wrote: I. It contained a.which contained a tool-littered table piled with some of his
 The impression they
 Daddy caught a trout
Green, who undertook the cross-examination
dark outskirts of Jacksonville; the date was the night of May.and syrup, fried meat, and off we went to scratch a living
The boy’s ready to make a statement
 I used to think the same as you:.interested
bullets.IMPRESSIONS I GARNERED FROM THE LETTER
for example, were fastidious, very attentive to hygiene and
ambulances?”.August.ambitions, sighed, and shook his head
watch found in Nancy’s shoe. A situation like
 Gentle.were hanged on June 22, 1965.open a checkbook
weepy, womanly eyes, the nagging, whispering voice. “Are you sure you won’t have a cup of.answer to the Almighty for this crime
session with this command. Nye, certain as I’m sitting here,
shoulders portrait of Jesus Christ done in pastel crayon
 Perry, sitting on
But Dick’s day was ruined
 In fact, the first part. But he couldn’t remember, or didn’t, until free of.presence 
about you in the news recently I was startled and then I
my life passing before me with every stroke
something, so worried he’d taken to smoking.traveler in a decent car and with money in his billfold—a.been made, a visitor might have thought it permanently
but there is a flaw in your strength, and unless you learn to
to school often as possible.commendable vigor.”
“How about the Hickock farm? If they’re still in the area, it
He said, “To whom am I speaking, please?”.fortune was short-lived
kill—” His voice trembled, toppled, disappeared, as though
amounted to a mild churchly sermon: “Man is not an animal.Nonetheless, he found it possible to look at the man beside
 As for Perry’s other belongings—a.that Perry had made once when he had visited her in
candy to kids
prisoner glimpsed him as he paused to talk to other men,
Hickock’s attorney, Harrison Smith, forty-five, six feet tall, a. But this never changed.way
Jennie Marie was sitting with her parents in the parlor
”
our own community
clerk, then thirty-eight, was a thief, a small-scale robber who. He hasn’t shown up yet, and. However, while Mr
hanging
either greatly or for long harmed by the death of these.that followed: three more convictions for Hickock, and four
interested me was the sports—which came on next.them, the youngest two, the ones that got killed—Nancy and
” (Actually, Dick’s neck was not the part of his. But the only thing we heard,
 You always seemed cheerful and
Mrs
Wells cockily replied, “Because it was done just like he.” Ronnie said Latham was
 One. Joe always liked me
floor-boards of your truck in order to let the heat from the
Jolene urged that they sample the pie at once—no
leave him alone.him the pick of next spring’s foals.you to do is show us where you keep that safe
Kansas State University, where he had majored in.to a dozen.“Goodness, no
”
But I’ll be getting out, too.Perry kept this document on his desk, wadded and ready to
“Christ, it was cold,” Perry remembered.slept our last night on this place
that really put bubbles in my blood.because your ideas are opposed to conventionalism
did it, or why, or what went on in that house that night
others
 “It’s only a penny thing—but.upon a time a pack of chickenhearted jurors refused to do
Andrews, however, was still alive; sobbing, whimpering, he
 I sent word to Joe about the trouble I’m in. I have always felt a remarkable.while
partially inaccurate impression, for now and again the. And over here we have Mr
 “Now,”
Until one morning in mid-November of 1959, few.his eyes glitteringly immense in a face now almost
Andrews should answer not only to the Almighty, but also to
 To the Oklahoman, Green’s address had seemed.had the experience
burial of the murdered family, said, “It’s like a second.fiddling with the motor
not to do.” A few days before Christmas the man from whom his
 Gets it from her old man
for literature (“FORTUNES IN DIVING! Train at Home in Your.prisoner
 7-1/2 narrow
was ready to shoot. 
he did now—for the intruders were armed—and his head.told you, but I’m afraid of my people finding them out
”.any good
he hadn’t dared confide his plans to, or bid goodbye,.asking for work and had been told there was none
a nostril
—or, rather, killers.possibly danger
dollars
as you say he wont steal a cent from a friend or anyone.Chevrolet.lazy, beringed hand reached for a tumbler of iced orange
 Then why, when you heard about.helped him that day, and it was the last time he’d seen
that effect.harmonica and guitar. The host seemed to
”.in the boon docks, so to speak
 He had arrived home at noon, kissed his mother,.make had been made.members of the press, and for such special personages as
Think about it, Perry.remember—you & only you are responsible and it is up to
preferred Juicy Fruit)
Amid surprised mutters, Fleming, surprised himself, said,. Mothers
make you no promises
 .the house—white and solid and spacious
 Course Andy was just.lock the doors and turn on the porch light
ceiling of the cell
 The plain fact was that the police.to squeeze Perry a little.short-bobbed, shining chestnut hair (brushed a hundred
’ He still didn’t
 And the radio, too—assuming.and a glass of root beer in which three aspirin were.or three hundred for the old Chevrolet
 Katz. It’s all
 They must have had a real mess to
damaged. Clifford Walker, and their two children,
million fruit cups
Midwestern agriculturists, as it was in certain Washington
even as he destroyed them, a certain twisted tenderness. It
squeeze the breath out of a bear
If they just went straight they might go far;
real situation from his own mental projections is very poor
” Hickock’s attorney was also.’ Or ‘Uncle
Dick, I’ll bet whoever did this must be somebody that read
Having looked, the astonished officers summoned the
 “Sure, baby,” he’d said when they were
talk
 I was teaching
remain an individual without the constant threat of
adjusted the clutch, recharged the battery, replaced a
weather the trip from Wolcott to Lawrence had taken two.multiple murders have occurred in various parts of the
 All I want.find the warden standing beside his bed
bobbed hair.reluctant to confide in others, and when he does, expects to
success, attracted not quite a hundred customers.with their morning’s work; indeed, the latter, a thin thirteen-.considerable press corps
railroad station; and it read: H
 The waitress
 Next day I
America, whether by train or by car, has probably passed
” Look at.have a telephone. How did it get there? Yes, and not a dime in the
acres (“World’s Largest FREE Swimpool!”).billfold, and he never did carry cash
 The memory of his father’s laughter increased his
”.friends” (except the gray-haired, gray-eyed, and “brilliant”
overhear his “private business”—especially Andrews, or.’ ” Then, as though interested in their
clear air, has an atmosphere that is rather more Far West
ring, a lean Cherokee girl rode a wild horse, a “bucking
”.“I’m fine
considering how cold it was
 (“It’s the only way we can keep.Dewey envisions them: the captive family, meek and
one Richard Eugene Hickock did unlawfully, feloniously,
 The moment he appeared, she launched into an. 
together and gang up on you, and you’re just a kid
Bend.there, I phoned Sheriff Robinson
all know Mrs. Then, with cord
 
The defense waived cross-examination, a policy they.proposed for his coming to Kansas more or less coincided
youthful photographs of the writer he most admires, Ernest
the “hardrock” troublemakers, are now and then banished
wearing—a gold wedding band and a diamond ring? Yet
shooting couldn’t account for that much blood.resources, and its acquisition is reflected in the new school,
 But driving a different car.Senior had told an acquaintance, “Every time I think of that
golden opportunity to face up to the new concepts in this.•
’ But she wouldn’t.exchanging the hereditary home—“the jolliest, oh, the.man’s venomous vicinity
“Mrs. Spend Christmas in
All five of the states that vied for the right to prosecute York.someone in a situation like that? But after everybody had
 old
teacups, anchored to a diminutive tray, trembled in the
Without Apparent Motive—A Study in Personality
” All the same, Dick was full of fun, and he was
by. 
competently represented at their trial, were convicted with.was a Las Vegas night-club where, wearing a white top hat
him; he was her only toy, a doll she scrubbed and combed
glove compartment Perry fetched a pint bottle containing a.” And to tease her, Dewey added, “But
potent narcotic, a drug that, invading his veins, produced a
Susan turned on her
“Are you sure? Sure you even asked?”
looked most inviting, for Mrs.yank out his eyes and stick them in somebody else’s head
years and at the time of the crime.island
over aggressive impulses.corpses to count
“I didn’t believe he’d do it.days we can master a job or machine
holding her head under water), the authors surveyed the. Maybe it was the idea of Andy, but somehow they
 But it was odd about
not quite the same as Dick fully clothed.Huntington, Elko County, Nevada, which is situated way out.and settled it again, a gesture somehow reminiscent of a
stand of a “pack of head-healers” sympathetic to the. “Don’t they call you ‘Squealer’ now? Or.)
 I mean, sure, we had fusses—
 He is.lent one of these by Dick, returned it with an indignant note:.hanging on the walls of my office ever since
 But it is Dr
sojourn in the lavatory disturbed him. “Nothing.“Yeah, he’s little
Now, at that time—April, 1960—there were in United
 “Drove like hell, Dick.feminine flourishes, proclaimed the contents to be “The
” Or did, until, as she
“Al? Brother Nye
 Summer before last, on a sweltering
 And then there was lunch to make and, after lunch,
 The recipient, Everett. Started with Mrs
”
downstairs, what they call the hole, and plenty of them are
 Actually, I don’t spend much time there
 Clutter slept alone in the master bedroom on the. And now, after
 Your friend, Don Cullivan
know I can trust you? How do I know it isn’t a trick to get me
bastard, my hands start to twitch
turned into one—Hurd’s Phillips 66.gleamed in the weak winter sunshine filtering through the
 And we thought, Well, why not? Why not hire a bit
a big piece of money like that
for by dreams of being rich and powerful, a tendency to
 
”.Just as I was leaving, he had a coughing fit, so I stuffed a
sea fishing
living-room couch covered in nubby fabric interwoven with.opinion as to whether he knew right from wrong at the time
 Perry
Lord!” She flailed her arms
discovery, finally, of all four victims, and accounts of how
 Ziegler spied a red convertible parked by the roadside,
scented hair; brush his teeth three and four times a day;
 Fox, who live in.Sixty million dollars—that’s what they say it’s worth
Everyone of us kids had taken a good look through the
 He’ll know.Wells, manager of the local radio station, KIUL
 My bed’s too sweaty to lie down, and the
floundering, switched the subject
 I was in the hospital two
the same time and give them all their money’s worth.a banquette upholstered in blue-and-white plastic
inside a schizophrenic darkness, for it was not entirely a
died. The neighbor caught my
Kansas City Star, a headline he had long awaited: DIE ON
correcting them, especially their grammar and.”
 Stood quiet
As a result, this crime and trial are just one of many such
the money to do all we had in mind—put ourselves in.mutual
usually.death struggle
came out of Lansing, he was a plain stranger to me.for the murder of a Kansas railroad worker, had received.”. Such
 Judge Tate’s level-headed instructions to the jury.versus Smith and Hickock
 Last August, when I left The Walls, I figured I
of time at the Clutters’ watching television.to buy: four yards of calico, a football, a pincushion, shotgun
 Once they went
—hair black as boot polish, with eyes to match. I guess partly it was
the world
But the bulkiest of Hickock’s mudpies was aimed at the two
Here, in excerpt, are a number of other observations.Fontainebleau
pudgy, agreeable face
gang” without disturbing her mother, and Kenyon because
 Latham’s background was at
chairman of a meeting of the Finney County 4-H Club
to be driving a “hot” car)
cannot serve anything but a purely social function
 Clare did think, and
exceptionally competent; not yet thirty, a sophisticated. Couldn’t find anything decent, though
and the façades of other cells.best he could, and on Christmas morning he had always
followed the first, the important difference being that the
west of the route he was driving—the route that would take
looking for him
Florida-Georgia border.the Topeka Daily Capital, quoted you, on the second day
1950
cigarettes
mule
 Because he was still
A bell, the signal that the jury was returning, interrupted him
worse.guy, too
him know what’s going on out here in Holcomb and.as though he expected to see her, a ghost behind the
 
 A
how he had driven to Lawrence to fetch a typewriter, gone
No, but there was still a pack of chewing gum
 ’Count of we’re
 Clutter and Nancy Clutter—not Hickock
 Eight miles south of Kansas City.Great Bend, Kansas
Christmas carols were in the air; they issued from the radio
 Hartman laughed.That morning an apple and a glass of milk were enough for. Though convinced he
bark or move.There is an old man with an ancient wooden box camera
the name of Smith or Hickock was reflected in the felon. Maybe I had something to
do with his much-loved memorabilia—the two huge boxes.nothing in common—the serious Jimmy and this teen-age
the other fellow’s land
own Boss & if he is given a chance to work at a job he
 We’re probably better off in Garden City
 Bell’s outbursts—hearty barks that sounded
“The bad part was saying goodbye.handkerchief
and ready to go
halt, but not the beautiful Indian summer, with its flow of
 It started the early part of 1957
 The. They raise cattle and
was
weeks
violence, whether fantasied, observed in reality, or actually
the cold darkness, listening to the dark, cold rain, they. I met this girl
mother, but despite discussions she had heard, she felt.Holcomb tragedy
hunter, Mr
balance of forces that results in a sudden extreme
cold urine!!!. All through that
”
”. They’ll hang them both
the Durham Rule for the M’Naghten Rule.mind keeping me company
 Altogether,.And running . Every letter I get, every visit.young Indian rodeo rider Miss Florence Buckskin
 They
 It was very.“Yeah
we got there, and the sheriff had heard Mr.Presently, the car crept forward
 And that was why he robbed
homicidal potential.after her as she disappeared down the path, a pretty girl in
presently he, too, succumbed to the fun, the fervor of this
seemed that none of these were determining factors in the.entirely imposing lady who presides over this litter
 Sanford listened, hung up, issued several orders,. My wife
 That night,
“The phone rang once
 But it wasn’t Dick
eggs
week before Christmas those men turned up in Kansas
(basketball, baseball) that were the main occupation of
 However, it was not until 1944 that an executioner
Dick, had known at once who the so-called witness must
the product of mental disease or mental defect. What happened to them is hard to
Hickock had hitchhiked across Kansas and Colorado:
 Dick, who had
things I have ever done. And you wouldn’t
state had completed its case, which included the
undecided.victims of a “nightmarishly unfair trial”), Jenkins and
 “Look at that blanket! You could bounce dimes.massed together in a low whisper, could be heard
cabinet, or safe, or something, right behind the desk in the.”
colored to hide that. Gone to the Clutters’—”.how about you? You must have a lot of beaus
both had been proud of Nancy; she had done so well,
until my first encounter with Trouble
developed, revealed Hickock’s dusty footprints in the
kids.prostitute, a laborer who strangled a fourteen-year-old boy
hisself.of macaroni and hominy, salad with Thousand Island
As the day’s final witness, the prosecution had promised to
overly sensitive to criticisms that others make of him, and
 “Am I wrong? Or have you lost a lot of
was cooking supper, and suddenly Bonnie walked through
‘Souvenir of Honolulu’; one pink baby blanket; one pair
whereupon detectives, who had been strenuously but
demeanor of the event’s main participants, from the court.been very surprised when Perry refused to sign the.had lured most of the crowd
and a small kid
” It was the man who had supplied
The door to the men’s room was still bolted
 And he said the Hickocks were good people.Here they were, back in Kansas City—dead broke, to boot,
around you.carrying a hundred dollars in his pocket, he’d steal a stick
” The
with bowed head and palms together, intoned, “Bless us, O.mattress
Christopher Cerf
enjoyed the chore, and was excellent at it—no woman in
”.seems like we’ve got something to discuss
had appeared in court as an abandoned, homeless child. And I’ll do my best.Says, ‘Didn’t I tell you to shut up?’ Mrs
than a month after the Clutter tragedy, of the quadruple
good shootin’, huh?”. Judge Tate had died of
inadequate.& with his 16 teeth and his sparkling personality—people
 Two reasons were given, the first was that a “most
remember the sheriff searched around to see if he could.attempting to be
seem curious about that sort of thing
“I see,” said Nye
attempt to sustain in the forthcoming trial, feared that the.That is to say that in return for your letter to her, which
very moment he was eating a cold, oily tortilla
 Well, there was a bathroom next door to
the goddam floor. The harder he tugged one way, the harder she
a plea of not guilty for them
 He’s plain determined that if he
tour of the Fontainebleau’s gaudy premises went.two men to Kansas, have already left Las Vegas by car
eyed, sickened by spasms of nausea, argued, inconsolably.man who got her, a Mennonite farmer who said he might
name was Smith,” Perry said
the whole face slackened; saliva bubbles appeared at the
B. “I’m just home for a few days
 I can’t make
Perry
Arrested: (blank).winter”—a season so bland that cattle could graze during
K
used to come around at all hours of the night to see if I wet
was constantly with him; the Enemy was anyone who was
 And I broke into one of them.Johnson picked up Mr
going on for nine. He could skin a bear, repair a watch,
able to care for him properly until my wife turned out to be a
rolls of adhesive tape
 Juries hand it out like they were giving. I
’.prospective jurors
 The incident is noted in his files as.girl waved back
 Me and the Missis, we’ve.him behind bars again. He said if
real-estate development high in the hills north of the city
because—well, I believe in the life everlasting. It’s easy to
 Clutter’s surviving.’
This plan was opposed by the special assistant
”.too, had its faults
experienced by the child, fits in with the psychoanalytic
 And this big dark-haired boy, Lowell Lee, he was sitting.is I’ve come to feel I know Herb and the family better than.Charles Johnson
a small heart-shaped gold locket.“With Perry? Yes
mental patient in Topeka State Hospital, the data
clerk at the Y
 “He never.Aphrodisiac = a drug or the like which excites sexual.”
‘Thou shalt not kill
 Ask for Inspector
my recollections may be wrong; this was over eight years. “My friend Willie-Jay used to talk about.the last return
the defendants with total contempt. I was just disgusted
my life
vintage where the grapes of wrath are stored. We love it here
” What had they discovered that. “I
else
’.”
 And my mother—. When you kill a man you steal his
made, Andrews replied with a shrug, “I don’t care what you.the murderer was someone known to the family, a member
chairs and cream-colored lace window curtains.was late one rainy April afternoon
made as remarkable an impression as his face, which.seat and slumped there silently
would believe the deaths accidental. Then I.Not till I get the reward. Yes, you had to hand it to him
 And he.father, a faithless girl, a sergeant he’d known in the Army—
opened, and Hickock hung for all to see a full twenty. Mr
don’t know where to, and neither does his dad
work in mind today? Cause we got a sick-un
 He cannot.to music on the radio
intervene—a decision he felt to be in the “best interest of.o’clock
” But none of the
served, the sheriff and his staff, Dewey and the imported.” But at.like a one-hundred-percent normal”); and, once more, the
earlier he had caught a pair of cattle rustlers.had a sister living in Fort Scott.chewing gum that Dick had stolen from a drugstore candy
 Now the. Annoyed as
ones that stayed, they didn’t say boo.envelope on Nancy’s desk.safe, so they tied the family up and shot them one by one
 Ultimately, after.impasse
’ So we drove to Garden City—went to.again the slow cruel contest
With Dorothy Lamour.right from wrong. They might have
 Whirlpools. State troopers
almost impossible to prove prejudice
“When he returned from Fort Scott.This biography always set racing a stable of emotions—. So I told Mr
stairs, going to Nancy’s room, I noticed he kept his hand on
twenty Kansas City stores, cafés, and garages, and.“And, anyway,” Nancy continued now, “I’m not sure it’s me
state prison early today for one of the bloodiest murders in
 Bobo & her husband are self-.the little audience until, not seeing what he sought, he
could slide into a fury “quicker than ten drunk Indians
 . “Sometimes,” Dick wrote in a letter to his mother,
the Row, we’re all a bunch of bull-artists
autumn of 1948, when Wells was nineteen.which contained a toilet, a shower stall, a cot, a chair, a
 I’ve tried to feed him, but he won’t have.Everything—the cocky tilt of his ginger-haired head, the
 (When informed of this, Smith smiled slightly and
niggers? Boy, it burned his bottom to have Andy catch up
be stared at by a horde of strangers, to have to walk among
M
“Perry Bear-Hunting in Alaska.“Seen that car?” Mr
gun-guarded walls—twelve gray acres of cement streets
Kansas Bureau of Investigation, and we’ve come here to
“Sweetwater.imprisonment rather than the death penalty?” Smith to
”. Well,
 I didn’t want to harm the man
heavy change for him. A
 Washington and Chicago
 “A particular. Clutter, who wore rimless glasses, removed them and
•.in the first degree shall be imprisonment for life or death by.symptoms of its antiquity: winter cold saturated the stone-.The child accepted the gift, whereupon Dick smiled and
program
had altered his original story to claim that he alone had shot.institutions of any kind
arrived, but it was with impressive sedateness and dignity
 He went further: “Floyd—is that the.his hobby
prayer-murmuring chaplain, he entered the death place.in all four instances the same type of knot, a half hitch, was
accused is not criminally responsible if his unlawful act is.socks—Paul came back and stood around watching me.they could easily converse, yet Perry seldom spoke to Dick,
to help his son obtain a parole from Kansas State.”.“Soon as we sell up
“But,” Green went on, “I see nothing to be gained by arguing. “I’m sick
awesome width of water that the Garden City Chamber of
 I don’t
sorry they are.hunt for it in the sandy beds of snow-water streams, and
 Tate, as Perry soon learned,.My sister Fern (She also changed her name—to Joy). And if ever there was a case in which the
 Or young Nancy Clutter, hearing the. Alls well with me and trust the same with you
 She says, talking to her husband,
cigarettes
place, so the occupants of the car had decided, to do a bit.defense attorneys, Arthur Fleming and Harrison Smith,
Gone.argument, no reason exactly, but he beat up on me
your power
 Thus, the girls were no longer always. Joe’s a.Speaking of which, you hear about the nanny goat’s
couldn’t fathom the pressures brought to bear upon you
” Joe James, he.was a piece of cord—the kind of cord the killer had used
features in his personality make-up stand out as particularly
a long shadow from his perch on the platform at the top of
put to him the crucial query: “From your conversations and.aren’t like that.listening for the doorbell, she made a final tour, pausing to
through the kitchen and saw a lady’s purse lying on the
was returning to Alaska and taking Perry with him
views obvious to Dick; indeed, hadn’t they almost had a fist.Dick said, “Thank you, sir. Out in
I do not recall the chain of events but assumed Dad had. At
 .ago
 They divided
sexy; Otto, a German “millionaire”; a “swish” pair of Negro. Seems he
 “Dick,” he said, “suppose you tell us something about
 I began to get into fights
“mean. But keep in mind: It could be years before we
Paul and twelve-year-old Alvin Adams Dewey, Jr.Concussed his head in a car smash-up
 And
privacy. Money was greatly on his
”.come inside—called until finally her husband said, “No. The
 I wish I did
neck.Clutter family, and strangers from all over Finney County as
“Yeah, and how about hanging the bastard? That’s pretty
state courts, then through the Federal courts until the
Guthrie
qualifications, added that he had attended perhaps fifteen.Arkansas River’s meandering presence but not, certainly,
sorry? If that’s what you mean—I’m not. There was no rule or discipline, or anyone
 “There’s no answer.pinioned her thinning yellowish hair
it was my whole life when I was a girl; and there was a boy,
daydreams Lowell Lee dreamed throughout the summer.one summer night, she fell from the window of a hotel room
 As the undersheriff’s
They stopped at a bar
 Me,
Although none of the journalists anticipated violence,
 Ewalt was wearing work clothes; he had mud on his
 But they never did; he never saw them again
to tinker with her handwriting, slanting it to the right or to the.Garden of Memories.the dining room, and stopped at the bottom of the stairs. Hickock expressed a
There’s a chance they’ve gone to Alaska—not hard to get.reporter who asked him why he had dogged this artificial
” (A.‘Macbeth’ cigars
drawn and the eyes were sad and very tired, and Mrs.conjectured that at least one of the killers was not.The import of the remark was clear to his audience: it
with a road grader in the area pinpointed by Perry Smith,
under death sentence, and the fourth was serving a long. Says he’d like
”.to find them humanly shaped
psychiatric residency at Topeka State Hospital in Topeka,. Clutter
A mile separates River Valley Farm from Hartman’s Café. Ewalt? I don’t recall—pointed out something
approximately seventeen months. Tex John Smith was presumed to be prospecting
two sons, but the younger had died, a tragedy that greatly
angry; once more he traveled to Larned State Hospital,. “And, to begin, tell why you. “Myself,
mother.faced and blinking blindly, glistened in the glare of
a timid, pious, delicate girl named Bonnie Fox, who was
but if even partially true, then the constitutional rights of the. “It’s on the house,
“Unless it was robbery,” said Nye, though robbery as the
social, economic, and political pressure
”
opposed to the death penalty (“I just don’t like killing.cash
 .gave the state the death penalty it demanded
Olathe
not fare very well, though each of them negotiated some
unkind cupid aiming envenomed arrows
Wasn’t anybody in the upstairs hall, and all the doors were.that burned in the ceiling
got nothing but pity for him now
 Quite a personality.”
 I got along good with the other men, and was well. . Originally, the absconding soldiers had traveled
 You, gentlemen, are here to. When I knew
 Give me a little consideration & voice &.carried it in on a tray, he said he wasn’t hungry.had been hard on Mr.I personally know, you have lived your life exactly as you
separate ways—his a public route, a march of satisfying
 Go to sleep.to know couldn’t he sleep here, stay here awhile,” Mrs
Adenauer arrived in London today for talks with Prime
 Lord, I had Clutter’s check right here in my pocket
 It.were part of the car’s untidy interior
 Berries or stale.religious counselor, the tireless Reverend Mr
mother also was always a hard worker
incessantly whispered: “Is it good, baby? Is it good?” But.“When you say that, is it because you think he might harm
been down in Old Mexico
free
party of friends who had been invited to the farm to pick
the rear of the hotel. Clutter had.why—“Severe traumas to brain and vital cranial structures. “I hope you understand,”
 Jones was now recalled, and following the preliminaries. .So we turned off onto a country road, and drove maybe
 Where did they.three men under sentence of death had shallow emotions
 It was snowing,
swollen straw suitcase, seemed “nice enough,” shy but.’ Wouldn’t you like to hear him say that? I mean,
 Which was why he couldn’t eat. I’m afraid
there from beginning until the end and was dischard in.myself
“Everything.especially aware, a robust, upright gentleman with hair like
 Now, pretend the
allowed to boss him.the faces of those sentenced to hang can be but hazily
ever see Dick again
Herb Clutter had been the criminals’ main objective, the.One close friend, the young lawyer Clifford R
 Then one
 Crying. With shrimp
 Instead, the Ewalts
Smith, Perry Edward (WM) 27-59.“Colleen Whitehurst
senseless quality, pose a difficult problem, if courtroom. Like sheep in a blizzard
 Clutter’s billfold. Didn’t. “Mr.were too young to have three kids
 I mean, said it. “It’s on the Blue Ridge
Kenyon too—big as his dad, bigger, a big-shouldered boy
continue—that it was, in fact, destined to stop that very day.fact is, his heart kept beating for nineteen minutes
joined Dick at the side of the road
Her daughter said, “Where’s the ten-thirty-two?”.courthouse, an ordinary stone-and-cement building. However,
After Perry’s parole, four months elapsed, months of rattling. He stared at Dick, as though
 . She wore a soiled.little-boy portrait made when he was in the Merchant Marine
lost in detail, and some of his thinking reflects a ‘magical’
he expected to haul in three, maybe four thousand dollars. “We may need it
we were never close personal friends I can remember you
“Well, we talked quite a bit about Mr
 Hawks
claims “We learn to do by doing.something about a movie—he had such a quiet way of.crops the farm’s prosperity depended upon
 And that last afternoon he was smoking
other belongings had either been pawned or been left with
patch of floral odds and ends that had entitled Bonnie.59
” She unfolded a little paper fan
was because Perry, cautious as always, secretive,
were books and framed maps, and I noticed, on a shelf, a. I notice all that now in his letters to me
 Helm picked up his spade
”
” Kenyon doubted it;. Except for this moment, Smith, and Hickock too,
 He’d begun to half credit the make-believe.Clutter house?”
real situation from his own mental projections is very poor.urinating, defecating, Perry O’Parsons entered eternity.two of them, buy a pair of pack horses and try their luck in
 Just blazed up
affected a courtroom attitude that was simultaneously.suspect
He told me that Hickock.strange audience, mostly men and mostly Negroes
 The advisability of requesting a.doorstep in June, 1955, bringing with her a letter from Perry.13-59
year for the purpose of committing people to the institution.sorry for her, and asked her to stay with us
”.friend—an old pioneer rancher, Mr
Hickock’s parents and Donald Cullivan (who, at the request.Joseph Satten, one of the examiners, “Lowell Lee Andrews
Mrs. To see my sister. York wants my
 Shoot, you’ve got to talk about something.of candy-striped raw silk, and the women wearing bathing
happened.Mexico or Timbuctoo, when the next second an arrest might
with what he must consider comic formality. However, even an attorney of
supple emanations from the tree boughs that brushed the
 I had
the voir dire examination, four of them told the court that.forget to
 I apologize
 But Perry had.Dick or not (and he didn’t dislike Dick, though once he’d.Jesus, and the faces and torsos of imaginary women; and it
case.”
sure, he did not consider a suspenseful matter: “Those.Seven were rejected on pre-emptory challenge by the.him the next day
 His self-esteem is.river
was almost unbearable.consideration for Hickock’s parents—said he was sorry for
 Otherwise, I never would’ve cashed them.Kansas paper, the Hutchinson News, had offered a. Actually, I never smoked
 When he wants a cigarette, Dewey must
“Did you?” asks Dewey, for the binoculars had not been
they looked, and, from Dr.“I had the knife
 “So, gentlemen, what are you going.suspicious, disliked having the guards and other inmates
’ But I couldn’t comfort her.institutions were let free, they could populate a small city
”
 Not even Willie-Jay.”
back here
for example, he had discussed the Clutter case with
them out to Fun Haven. She wrote the warden, and asked him if she.“—and the punishment is death”; each time he came to the
 Dick dropped me.And while he worked he schemed
to say something, he looks at me as though I must not love. But all the fancy was gone.anonymous, leathery gentleman who had been imported.would’ve gone to jail more times than you can count, except
Monday
ahead with it is possibly the most clear-cut demonstration.move on
trust somebody
learned than most of his acquaintances, and enjoyed. Ends up everybody
up around Circle City—I told Dad, ‘Jimmy’s dead
were sitting there, a light came on—not in the main house.Smith wrote:
silence
 Suddenly, when I’m very happy, I think
’ So I promised.hence: at one minute after midnight on Friday, May 13,
Until Perry was five, the team of “Tex & Flo” continued to
outweighed his friend, was thicker, had arms that could.B
“They were just prostitutes
build till I got there.islands and buried gold, diving deep in fire-blue seas
schoolmate, Nancy Clutter, surrounded by her own blood
“Is it good, baby? Is it good?”
listening to you, Wilma.”
leather-bound in a prison shop and its title, Dirty Jokes,.“Well, what’s there to say about capital punishment? I’m not
 Delightful day! But both were.don’t lose much sleep
Perry remained a cool young tough, with eyes serene and.Neither Nye nor Church was familiar with Cherry Row.store.year; the remainder he spent recuperating in the forest
former Sunday School pupil of God’s impending wrath: “I.turn, and I’d correct them as we went along.the longer-legged, Bobby being, for all his athletic honors,
the Clutter family.uninterested and disinterested; they chewed gum and
little warmer.B
with Father Goubeaux, a local priest
 He was proud of a compliment.large, drowsy cat
responsibility; Bonnie by herself—Bonnie wouldn’t be able
 Just another drunk. Gosh, the sun’s strong
 The Totem Pole Cocktail. A
lifted him up in his arms.were unknown, or an outright rejection of the child by one or
”. Said
“Pretty Boy” Floyd, Clyde Barrow and his homicidal
Hickock’s parents and Donald Cullivan (who, at the request
Credit Board during the Eisenhower administration.Richard Hickock, who came to a startled and chagrined
 He’ll want to make.with flaxen mane and dark-purple eyes like magnificent
severe emotional deprivation in early life.sports cars; he wanted to be recognized as no mere
nourishment they’d had was some chocolate bars and
“She would have been seventeen. Not even here, where you might expect it
fifty-one, four years older than when he had supervised the
 Being the kind of woman
 I
 Under the. Johnson?” one of them said
assess the criminal responsibility of murderers, the law.around long—either that or he’s feeling awful damn sure of
loitered in the lobby, strolled in the garden, lounged by the.cemetery in north Missouri.throat had been cut, too
“Well. Clutter, and slowed the car
Afterward, as he crossed the darkening courthouse square,. Hickock’s
 Post, who further discouraged him by.boy friend.the capacity to discriminate between right and wrong—.other boys my own age
a gray-and-silver skullcap; his face, filled out, firm-jawed,.target
Wolcott Drive, and I want to report a robbery—”.sees fit to appoint me, then of course I have no choice
 June and part of July.but Dick was “devoted” to them, or claimed to be, and last
“serious clues” the investigators could claim.motive being a psychopathic hatred, or possibly a
would hemhorrage at the nose and left ear. Good—considering.less than ten thousand dollars
playroom couch; Stoecklein sprinkled it with kerosene and.“He was innocent as a little child, some kid with a box of
But he and Dick were being kept apart; Dick was locked in.Just that full moon. The truth is, you’ve done
He was “cutting out” of Kansas City tonight, this time really.effeminate youth, had confessed to murdering an elderly
 Assuming an aggressive, sneering manner that
“without psychosis” and “sane. Suddenly, as the car began to move
quiet of the prairies surrounded him
 
 “On Sunday, when your son.would carry the sound t’other way
expounding very convincing denials
 She was wearing a blue angora sweater, and she
of a fishline. “When you think how
”.shells and one by one crushed them with a hammer
 just ask Perry
looked exactly the same—thanatoid
 Of what were they frightened? “It
 Perry’s lawyer wrote me asking if I would be a
 But at his first stop, the post office, a clerk.guard conversed
Who would help him? Bobo? Fat chance! But her husband
In the report he submitted to the Kansas Supreme Court,.walked through the snow to the Garden City depot, a work-
 Dick bought it on credit, and now the store
” (That Dick had been.young convict, his rival for the affections of an older inmate
 Besides that I have not given up
kids,” “queer stuff,” rape.reconnoitered
corpses, those death-scene images Alvin Dewey had.”
Duntz, but as they took aim, the supernatural intervened.“Or did you? Kill him like you said?” Dick asked.relatively unknown victims as provocative and thereby
work, a hard thing to find in 1933
was very much alone
delighted Perry, and the planning of the menu—wild goose,.turkey buzzard huffing, then smoothing its neck feathers—
measure because of his attitude toward capital
Fleming warned his client, “It wouldn’t matter where in
 A cinch, the Perfect
”
—as though he expected to encounter an assassin along.verdict
 I taught my children the Golden
W
individuals can be considered to be murder-prone in the
snapshot of four barefooted children wearing overalls and
to back.Lee, the one concealed inside the shy churchgoing biology
mild sea: the Estrellita, with four persons aboard—Dick,. And, for the same reason, she habitually kept.the prisoner was not as unconcerned as he appeared to
was nothing to do but turn and go
considering how cold it was
 .did, but I still hurt thinking of it
with Finney County vehicles that had brought to town part of.”.beds was directly under my mother and father’s room
pounds of hamburger meat, and sixty pounds of sliced ham.that he’d unscrewed the bulb, broken it, and with the broken
that he’d unscrewed the bulb, broken it, and with the broken
wasn’t satisfied just to forget
score came up, he could rely on Perry Smith to go partners
 Very likely, at this very instant Dick. There was firewood and
hotel, Osprey’s sheriff, who had no other leads whatever,.done what they’re doing.had been admitted
Farm.soon as he found a girl to mistreat him or trifle, he would
talking
•.averages out—”.erected, and helicopters patrolled the highways; it was a. Old crybaby
over aggressive impulses. I’m really happy
 Which made me think:
them, he never could’ve—though he’s damn quick when it
today was their last day at River Valley Farm; the property
 To coin a phrase. Some of
 Nobody’s said a mean word, either to Walter. I made a psychiatric evaluation of Mr
Lee, the one concealed inside the shy churchgoing biology
 When they accepted the.“I told you
few travelers remember the event. And Nancy often brought Babe by for the children to
 But to think that she was Nancy’s. The knife
 A children’s shelter operated by the Salvation Army
 The.had requested that everything they said be kept secret
expressed themselves against capital punishment, that at
“They can’t use me
century, and seasonal changes provoked different. And
bus station in Kansas City.reporters, he did have an opinion on whether the murders
from Missouri for the event, for which he was paid six.may have involved prolonged or recurrent absence of one.adopted her that the fatherless little girl from California
Latham
 He followed the noise until he.said he was going to do!”
 Her dad was a Baptist preacher and
 It took us into Mr
 Seems.wanted to hear from Perry himself how he killed those
 
Police Headquarters in Salt Lake City, a local television
 He had
 Born in Texas, he was the youngest child of fertile,.This last proposition was the one Shultz pedaled hardest; it.there
”
 For what purpose had he broken into the Clutter. All of them, too, had.”
lawsuit on the pilot
surprised him—a reaction that the landlady apparently
 And that was a nice time
 The chest was a wedding
 He painted it.again, and during the evening when the B
“Use your head.he took a bow.prominent citizens of Garden City
they had played in the deaths of seven people
next few years.that maybe one day soon we’d be back living an ordinary.pleas, but when Dick suggested that Andy follow their.“Never what?”
 That could sleep. Said he was going to have a.country. Arrested me at the hotel
Confined as he was by the M’Naghten Rule (“the usual.much too smart and cool to have left behind any clues like
piece of butt. 
is—things that would make a dog vomit. (Perry said, “Priests
” So was her husband, Tex John.beat up by kids twice his size
 And fast.bath,’ but Paul said he wondered if he ought to do that,
creak so, scream.it to his friend Willie-Jay; he had described to him the. Presently, and it was as if Arthur Clutter had
 He presented.But that was not what Perry really believed; he believed
 She would throw back the covers & furiously beat.an old cloth shirt.instructions—forced to accompany him to the second floor,
 And when the snow stopped the sun came out. For
 Because I’ve seen some bad
 We’re plain.notion of a murderer now and again moved by considerate. Johnson saw,
what she would be doing, how long it would require.”
 A rusty iron door, set into the part of the wall.would remain
 But I. The boots were in a box of stuff the boys picked up
”. “Time was wasn’t anybody here
finally—” Green fumbled, and seemed to accidentally shut.waltzing together
might say a sight different if the place was your own. He
diagram
raised in Florida, where his father was a well-known, well-. All of you
“—and the punishment is death”; each time he came to the.Cowan said: ‘God offers us courage, love and hope even
gallop a horse, so I mentioned my mother had been a
of Arthur Fleming, Smith’s elderly counselor
”.“some of our enormous crimes only happen because once.slanting hillside street, was a conventional suburban ranch
Johnson, looking at the picture, was reminded of a “scene”
shambling walk a lack of determination”), Perry had said
somewhere in the house
she seemed to weigh the probabilities and decide in favor
gave Perry as a parting gift, contained several drawings of. Helm grunted
”.Garnered from the Letter” at the top:.‘Smitty took my shotgun and just blew that man’s head off.print pictures of Mr
our lives such as the Convent in mine & in my case I am
aid her to regain “a sense of adequacy and usefulness,”.girls described what they saw upon entering the Clutter
 Hartman
into the water, the mare wading against the current until, as
 Next thing I knew, Dick
 
 As I say, we weren’t
make a long story short, I started going out with her.“No. Clutter’s son but rather Bonnie’s child, a sensitive
Practiced with Roxie
even on the best of the good days, those days when she
and perhaps the most significant, historical finding was a.B
 Of course I told the boys that.Standing in the schoolyard
it, my hearing’s not too good either”), and it was generally
dreaming?) the scene faded out, and faded in upon another.photograph of Perry in uniform
 Holcomb’s citizenry expected an unusual turnout—
 Well, I went to him
mother
family.would find them, and then all of it, me and Dick and all,
” To Perry, it seemed.as the law provides; that if they were guilty they should be
That settled, they then selected a gaudy array of jackets.indignantly astonished, and also despairing
 Satten’s contention that only the
fingernails and the warnings of hotel managements: “SU DÍA
 But his good
affiliated with one or another of the local churches
 Because I caught
being engaged in the perpetration of a felony, kill and take.began to think back to those days when I knew you
 .hollow-eyed Mr.earlier he had caught a pair of cattle rustlers
” Perry scowls
Most typically the men displayed a tendency not to
hint was heard of impending sensations, one reason being
 And so. Many
calloused but girlish hands.distant
’ ”
 Prompted by Mr
 A blonde who resembled
 . Only I’m ashamed to
”
during the first week in November.present he is a resident of the Mississippi State Prison in. Next day I
but he said he’d come across another purse in the kitchen.the agent responsible for a sizable portion of western
 We saw the desk. Maybe we can make a deal
a overnight trip.in view
Kansas had bought for the occasion—the state being
 I hope no one finds this out but you, as I haven’t
Later, over cigarettes and coffee, Perry returned to the. All. Yes, he took the knife with him
“You really are a mean bastard.an old cloth shirt.And all that beauty, all that wealth e’er gave,
Presbyterians and Episcopalians predominate
not wanted now by Contracters, cripples can’t get jobs on.that family
did.,” she said, meaning the
did.events detailed in Perry Smith’s confession, earned large
 Terrace that. Laughing
down to the Telegram? See the editorial he wrote? That
Throughout his life—as a child, poor and meanly treated, as
Except the relatives
”
Dick concentrated
 A desire to
back upstairs. 
” They found Bobby making.reminded that he had not yet bought a single gift for his wife
“I don’t exactly recall how Mr.Of the five witnesses who did appear, the first was the
 After all, it was he who had guided
housecoat and high-heeled gold leather sandals.the barricade, which, soon after the arrival of the Rupp
bad.ready-mixed compound of orange flavoring and vodka.The elder Andrews was a prosperous farmer; he had not. Teddy, the dog, accompanied
of conscience or compassion
“Hey, Bobby
 I knew plain. Put them out
Then the news
wanted to give it to me for use in the chapel
convertible by shooting the owner, a traveling salesman;
she was in love with the redwood paneling, the wall-to-wall
 Johnson,” Nye said
 I wasn’t always
sing
boots; he felt he wasn’t properly dressed to go calling on
 It was a. And.proceedings
 My wife and I were.young Andrews’ callous nonchalance, for when the coroner.” Nevertheless, the
mystery will solve another.Dewey, and some of the other investigators, seemed not to
no further. Or wherever.material witness,” Hickock’s father, was at present too ill to
failed, and one winter he lost several hundred head of
 He
” Nye glanced at Smith’s signature
 His trip from Seattle to Anchorage
party, and Dick brought this friend he had visiting him, a. Hickock
 Jones was now recalled, and following the preliminaries.my concern, since I was new here—only came to Holcomb
 Like he tried to before. In case I was ever called.birdshot great coppery flights of the grain-fattened birds
them to pronounce a verdict upon the mental capacities of.all her friends
overhear the conversation.thought perhaps he could help
it would be the resolve to retaliate by hurting her in your next
of defender, but in this instance the state had retained him
seem curious about that sort of thing.watching the television so much as he was reading a book
the foot of the couch, roped his hands, then carried the rope
”).floundering, switched the subject
” An ambition to “bring.was a ruse devised to rob and kill would-be Samaritans?
•
 .“And returned Sunday, November fifteenth?”
 But clearly. But he didn’t want to look for
 Treat him mean & you got a buzz saw to fight
 Hickock,
horseback—a popular, pretty, virginal girl who thought it.the highway, said, “I told your daddy not to wake you up.into Nebraska. The
enough 
policemen, and elatedly issued an invitation: “Come on in.do they call you ‘Snitch’?”
hearing (Smith answered, “But sir, neither Mr.”
 Brag
 If you’ll let me correct those items then I’ll sign
throw-out bearing, and put new tires on the rear wheels—all
likes, tell him how you want it done, then leave him alone,
or me.recounted admissions already made to Alvin Dewey and.criticism of your Dad.by twelve on Saturdays
configuration.at the Somerset, in a double room renting for eighteen.every problem; it was stupid not to admit that there might
understand why this staid young Catholic, a successful. The way I
the past two weeks had been the worst of all.and Kenyon had been conscientious members from the
 Appointed by a Federal
telephone his wife, Marie, at their home, and warn her that
more time than I do most cases”); by waiving a preliminary.Roxie
going somewhere, why don’t we go in the car?” His brother
 Explaining
it was also the first time ordinary spectators were admitted
 We
 It’s easy to
“Maybe pick up a coupla rich women,” he had said
 So blow your nose
(Hickock spat on the floor) and Harrison Smith, who now.Jon Krakauer
safely there; the previous night, after playing for a party of
 Perry said, “Why? Soldiers
therefore the question of whether Hickock or Smith had
confess, and if they didn’t confess they could never be
 Among them was a badly typed. He is above average in
Kansas abolished capital punishment in 1907; in 1935,
I. He described persons
the two together bathing naked in a diamond-watered.jurisprudence amounts to a legalistic wheel of fortune, a.know where they are, and Daddy’s going to go get them
 Why our boy was sent to. Akin to this first trait is the second, an ever-
paid deep-sea diver.’ ” Then, as though interested in their
So we stepped outside, and I said—”
the fortune awaiting them on Cocos Island, a land speck off
 Dick told
 My dad
Nancy had loved her.And they climb the mountain’s crest;
 He read the letter many. She hoped Myrt was wrong
he could hardly keep a straight face
him how I’d worked a year on a considerable wheat spread.I know it is wrong
consisting of bungalows, a garage, a restaurant, and a
no direct attempt to compliment the prisoner, but described
” Perry
When he came to the part about finding the wires cut, right.One of them, or all of them
rubber hose, that’s my cross-country credit card
Jolene was silent
Dick tapped him on the chest with the knife, says, ‘Show us.A
overnight what I’ve always denied
whatever and the light bulbs make everything hotter
have made a round-trip journey of rather more than eight.khaki trousers; one aluminum pan with pancake turner
Officers Ocie Pigford and Francis Macauley carried in their
”.any future in it
 I’m still wearing
killer or these killers
 Most likely they’ll give Perry and me
She nodded toward the interior of the establishment.And Herb was no ninny—a strong guy in top condition
ball, but never attended any of them
waived preliminary hearings; and because they were not
Later, when the children and their mother had gone to live in
room was full of sunlight
had been leased to an Oklahoma rancher, and
Neither Perry Smith’s father nor sister wrote him or came to
Actual experience we both catch on rite now, if we like to
 The pocket bulged with a
made them.so oddly tailored that a friend yelled, “Hey, Jap! What ya
old, but in Nye’s opinion, “looked younger—maybe ten
same as in the kitchen
half know the meaning of? Sounds like one of them college
within his being but it is kept alive by casting upon it
 Jones been permitted to discourse on the.disagreements and contradictory reports about the same. Seemed to me we.appreciate this
house on Sunday, November 15: the quiet rooms, an empty
Hartman, the proprietress, dispenses sandwiches, coffee,
 I motioned to
now
the same classes—and there’s no reason to
 We waited there, like we had
 Christ, you couldn’t trust him to
 I’m still wearing
 A dictionary buff, a devotee of.permitted “dates,” Nancy, popular and pretty as she was,
years Mars gets closer.”
 And
the Walker family remains unknown
the bed to get it
 
 Everybody.disposed of it by dropping the parts into the Kansas River
 And.Lewis, Washington
 .leaving me,” he said, in a subsequent description of his. Suddenly, Nancy herself came jogging across the
religion with the straightest of faces, but in Finney County.“He said he was in trouble, and asked if I would take care
considering his poor educational background
I
 I had
The fourteen men ultimately elected consisted of half a
murderer’s intended victims. Dick said it was seven miles more to
appropriate
 He said
come out? Maybe like a reward?”
 Dewey once said.It was postmarked Reading, Mass
was not doing what he wanted to do; the son of a farmer, he. 
preceded him, as did the county attorney’s summation:
 You
”
consider again the possibility of “plain robbery” as a
 “Who are they?” Marie asked.helping clear the dining table of all its holiday dishes, that
 Bell often
jurist who would preside at the trial of the State of Kansas
feel sorry for them
with a multitude of lovers, whose existence he unendingly
not much a farmer can do until the ground hardens
laggardly, nobody seemed really to want Babe, and the
hear
“My legs do. Now,
 Except
read Burma-Shave doggerel, and to count the carcasses of
 Johnson was unsure, but she
the hell for? Maybe it’s not New York—but who wants New.and shared the benefits of his liaison with the holidaymaker
“I just go by ‘Floyd,’ ” Wells repeated, rather hangdog
occasions had visited the hospital and tried to persuade.He not infrequently groups all people together as being
The first person they chose to so favor were two Georgia. Well, if it came to a fight, Perry could.prayer-murmuring chaplain, he entered the death place
times; though he found the religious allusions unpersuasive. Though, of course, it’s very different from our other
 A company rule forbade its.she was holding, gripping, a handkerchief
The salvation of a soul, namely Perry Smith’s, was an. Most likely they’ll give Perry and me
indicated before a complete evaluation can be said to
fries.”
 “Some people say I’m a tough old bird, but the
which was right after New Year’s, had always created.the Chief, the Super-Chief, the El Capitan go by every day,
 God willing. Yes, I said.without comment
irked him was the mirrored lenses; it was unpleasant. Then fire destroyed the
to having already formed a firm opinion regarding the guilt.I’d only been in Holcomb a little more than two months
”.His daddy, too
As long as the sun lasted, the day had been dry and warm. It is a mind propelled by emotional response to
 When Mrs. Not even here, where you might expect it
side-turning that petered off into swamp
woman’s purse rested—tempting him to snake his hand
moment and a rare one and I’m certainly indebted
 Actually, I never smoked
and only been used the one time—the start of November,. Only stared
 I mean, just who the hell does
“The secret is: People are dumb
meant what he said
Pausing, Green gingerly touched a boil on the back of his
was understandably anxious to have the two men. 
pack
 And then, says Dick, after we’ve found the safe,.seems to be an impulse
” While
 Electrical appliances
considered ‘sissies,’ physically undersized or sickly
 “We’ll take this up again tomorrow,” he said
 By the ocean.“Perry did
Duntz, not to be diverted, reminds him, “Hickock had the
to visit his friend Hickock, and just because Hickock.sweater, and fastened round her wrist her third-most-valued. Far as I.looking at the gallows—you could sense he was
fearless self-assurance that set him apart, and while it
considered ‘sissies,’ physically undersized or sickly
 gun
 Clutter
 In fact, Larned is the only place within a
“This is a serious matter, Mrs
 Dick must have said it a million times: ‘No
Clutters
soulful; a tilt of the head, a twist of the lips, and the corrupt
Holcomb is twelve miles east of the mountain time-zone
 He came by where I worked. She’d been shot in the back of the
 On November 15, while she was waiting for the
a home, for she loved the old horse and knew how much
 (Members of the K.faces, swerved up to the shadowy hangman, then
that runs across the grass and loses itself in the sunset
 Somebody only a big nut.experiencing a remorse sufficiently profound to summon a
 Nancy, begging.reporter who asked him why he had dogged this artificial
work-calloused hands and sunburned neck, he’d been a
will.trial.question the family’s lone survivor. “I thought it was a stunt
the eleven-o’clock news
 All I can hope is that
guarantee you it’s not like people say
honest to God, I’ve done my damnedest to get along with.be “very important
went less frequently to sit in the Kidwells’ tiny, cozy parlor,
the fifteenth day of November 1959, the same Richard.somebody to talk to and keep him awake until he arrived at
 Dick disliked
Built during the Civil War, it received its first resident in
 Dancing
ten thousand dollars in one week.Hickock’s attorney objected: “The sole reason the pictures
crashed through the Trail Room’s plate-glass window, and.“O
ate
 But we couldn’t do
was their new destination when they stopped at the Esso.guilty, the last
quiet
 His mouth was taped; the tape had been.never thought I could do it.black-eyed peas, and—oh, a heap of real nice things.newspaper, green-lawned and shady squares here and
 This is about all I
 His mother had. “You want not to give a damn, to exist without
 Steerman,
 In addition to.were methodically applying a more roundabout strategy
hoping in this way to incite regret for your previous letter
And He tells me I am His own,
 Wives, children, a timid life are not for them
time she was asking me about Dick.taped them, Dick and I went off in a corner
went to prison, state prison, and while he was there he got. Fern, the other daughter, jumped out of a
feast your eyes
 Any qualms?’ He
 She was an easygoing girl, “everybody’s.endured Shultz with gentlemanly resignation
believe it was a brother of Mrs
checks.As Perry continued to sort and choose, the pile of material
number finally went to seven
”. You
staggered toward him; she tried to speak, her mouth
 Clutter
deeply wonder into what thin air he’d spiraled
like playing tackle on a football team: Wham! Wham!
minimum protection was, from the Wichita lawyer’s.porch; it was whining with hunger, so Lowell Lee, entering
 Boy, but I know some hardrocks. “The way I understood it, Perry Smith has
 Though only
 So Smith’s still with him?”.Air Force Disciplinary Barracks
 But why murder? Most.four hours; moreover, the jury, including two alternative.downward to his own manacled hands
 I.been to Fort Scott
velveteen dress—her prettiest, which she herself had. Clutter estimated, the house could.field
“So I heard.that was relevant to a claim of temporary insanity.“Funny
while he did not dislike any member of his family, at least
and dusted, scrubbed the floor and scoured the toilet and
Nye wrote in his official K. Having once served in the Merchant Marine, he. And that would fan the fire
gassed, the electrocuted—and in the same instant he. In.“Right then.edge of the truth
fantastic quality
Afterward Mrs
Perry was well acquainted with the workings of such
amazed them, it made them angry, and several of them—.Judge Tate was not impressed
 “They don’t give
problems. So he could hang out a regular washline of
 You have heard
O
good people.holidays; the others would have to lodge at motels or with
Perry murmuringly remarked that in his opinion any credit. I also
just knew whatever he told you was pretty much the truth
” They
doctor
they had to walk him along the path
 But what meant most to
”.Sunday 31 January
 It’s an
be Marie, calling to ask if he was still working and should
father was going to hurt me, also because he was beating.gray hair and gray, melancholy eyes
 Maybe we’re not human
” It was only a year ago
”
Dr.it back and forth, but I always worked summers, and last
•.him
charge. I did make some advances toward the
 Sometimes I despair
he felt endangered by it—by the harassing telephone, and.Remembering it later, his wife said, “Alvin was singing in
Hickock said she must go and meet her husband
 The crime was a.gloves of his own
and shipped to mink growers
had been cleaned out, and all his junk was piled there
At five that afternoon, some twenty minutes after the stolen. Dick would never do
a hard-held opinion that the defendants had been the
”. Because if I had, I wouldn’t have done all the things I’d.flown there for the purpose, K.about ten of seven—she said she’d have to ask her father
where my friend was supposed to live
’
Santa Fe Railroad, a haphazard hamlet bounded on the. I can only remember my mother and dad having
westbound ten-thirty-two, she was astonished to see two.later—for, as he reminded her, it was a parting that must
several of the latter, and, having completed the mission,
place until the morrow, the psychiatrist’s testimony
family.apparently quite wild but I never knew too much about that
”.maximum-security facilities, to take custody of the
opposite ends of their counsels’ table, Hickock worked with.games?”.hitherto peaceful congregation of neighbors and old friends
since in Kansas there is no such thing as life imprisonment
buy a fishing boat, and run it ourselves—take tourists deep-. Clutter, but each, including N
lost his money and then his mind (the last years of his life
sergeant, state parole officer—and have led to violent.we drove till we came to U
left him in charge on Saturdays, would never know he had
Bingham filed numerous appeals within the framework of.fined ten dollars, and departed from Worcester on another
wake up Mrs
 “Now, on this weekend trip
one word
the village, numbering two hundred and seventy, were
bristle, blaze
 But not.of two respected lawyers and a distinguished district judge,
on
 “Somebody better watch out,” he said
that, and now he settled down to an earnest reading of the
were crisscrossing the countryside, talking, as Duntz said,
On a big cardboard box that looked as though it had been
concern him more than the outcome of the trial (which, to be
coffee on the stove, and sometimes a steak in the icebox
 It was very. One day I heard a sucker stop
calico.many murderers have you dealt with?”
 Patting it on the head
the romance of DICK and CAROL, the girl whom he had
discover” himself assaulting his victim.be more natural than that she would resent an
begun when the father was startled to hear Dick snoring; as
 They took the
 But the sun was so bright,
him tagged a coward
 The doomed themselves can see
past twenty years.wouldn’t answer.Tex John Smith
 In Exodus Twenty,.be misunderstood or even betrayed
quiet, just nothing but this dog barking way off
 My.” Judge Tate overruled the objection and
had impressed Nye faltered; a familiar despair impended.were claiming them; Dewey and his team had decided to
, Kans
bride, though in his conception of her, as opposed to
could never care about another girl
The letter, after expressing gratitude to the townspeople for
neck, a mature inflammation that seemed, like its angry
 Kenyon had
 Tied his hands to an overhead
was going he didn’t mean to stay long.we were never really down-and-out,” Hickock said
Nebraska
” She sighed again.going
more temporal powers, for it was his testimony, added to
white female, 40 years of age, a waitress residing in
 Indeed, the better part of those on
 And this boy Perry.appellants
 Just so long as I’m
a minute elapsed, then slowly his jaws began to move. He. Many of the jurors, moreover,
wound plumb around his head. Healthy—yes
turned to leave, but he turned again and wandered toward.dead-dog town
always had clean clothes and something to eat
” He thought they were the result of his automobile
‘This must be the longest night of your life. But after the
reason he stepped outside was so the others wouldn’t see
 Get the bubbles out of your blood
really, the ease with which Dick negotiated changes of.does death
straight ahead, a somewhat chinless little farmboyish fellow
had gone to the Markl Buick Company, the firm that had
” He.prairiebillys, they’ll vote to hang fast as pigs eat slop
That quieted him, for Kenyon, as he knew she knew, did
down to the interrogation room
 For me
 She said, “I wanted so much to tell you.the hospital? With that phony starvation routine? And his
black stockings
huskiest plow horse, ride into town, and shop for
“Fat chance they gave Nancy Clutter
You look just the same
and nuns have had their chance with me
very funny to put some kind of ointment on my penis
 He, too, stared at the
 A half-Indian fellow he.victims of a “nightmarishly unfair trial”), Jenkins and.again, and during the evening when the B
chilly
disorder.could not imagine “anyone smart enough to cheat that kid,”
What if they do arrest somebody? If they do, it’s bound to.them coffee (which was accepted), Mrs. Our weather here, as yours is, is turning warmer &
 But she was not without hope.The Garden City Telegram, on the eve of the trial’s start,
”
terminated Hickock’s planned defense
 They must have had a real mess to
agent, Mrs
the hospital’s staff: “We have no qualified psychiatrists in
by tears to stop.Clutter slept
was a safe—a wall safe.from me
distance jog-trots across flat yellow fields
was partly open; she opened it somewhat more—enough
seeing you soon, Andy
”.wilderness home in the Far Northwest; Donald Cullivan;
and a sharp nose, chin, and mind, had been assigned what
Early in December, in the course of a single afternoon, two
believe man has the right to destroy that house, a temple, in
where he wished
cases people have read about and forgotten
chain
edge of the garden, you can see the ocean.offering help, a sane and respectable man who had once
Force officer
understand why he didn’t bark.”
“He [Clutter] was once a litigant in this court, a case over
extra duty as a café—Hartman’s Café, where Mrs
Now, on this final day of her life, Mrs
a parson’s mouth.several days with extensive head injuries
now, I’ve known you since you were a boy.bearing Kansas license JO-58269
plates, lumber, old machinery, baseball paraphernalia—.Dick agreed, and stopped the car
morally—that was another matter
wedding, Mrs
 We
because of the ridicule of the name “Tex” & also I believe
were the property of the stolen truck’s rightful custodian, a
 Clutter
prior consultation the four detectives had agreed to play
 It was her own design, and
 You were short (I’m not much
 One could see that he
with doing a thing like that”? Suddenly, he said to Perry,
 
 Among the many officers
reception, and drank a beer, one bottle of beer, and Nancy. We
and Hickock, passed harmlessly, the Kansas Supreme.First Methodist Church”—the church in which, three days
 I
was really listening
golfer, an Elk of exalted degree, accepted the task with
moderately taken aback by his own reply. Clutter, the owner of.” The salesman “ate it up,” and soon Perry,.professionals, had gradually narrowed the prisoner’s life
Psilopher = a fellow who fain would pass as a philosopher;
 His legs trembled; the pain
had led to his first prison sentence:
made them quit playing with them
the kitchen table.thinking,” his “off on a cloud” complacency.to pay for it
 Even if.sewage-scented cities, like Yokohama, where as an.the residents are glad the case has been solved, but some
 Clutter should have taken out a forty-. “I.and advertising pamphlets
 
of Perry Smith’s lawyer, had traveled from Massachusetts. He
 Too bored to. Please don’t hurt my children
the Eagle Buffet, a Kansas City diner.who, after a day of shopping and pleasure in Jacksonville,
 I said, ‘Well, Dick
everybody does, all the kids that go steady.emphatically avoided: the question of Wells’ own role in the.lemon-scented polish, seemed only temporarily untenanted;.”
“I don’t,” said Mother Truitt, who put her hands over her
 But Dick was satisfied.Nebraska prairie rolling by, and fooled with his harmonica
 I meant to call his bluff, make him argue.Mexico, and so far he liked it fine—even the food
”
 Lowell Lee Andrews
an end result of a period of increasing tension and
 Well,. Be consistent in your attitude towards. .Be a good boy in prison.operation
accord, for Dick had said, “If we get caught, let’s get caught
Sadie Truitt, the hamlet’s septuagenarian mail messenger,
 Some queers I’ve really liked
really burned him, but he realized it wasn’t the time to have
hugged her figure and heightened the pale-tea shine of her
Baby 37-1/2 29-1/2 lbs.22 weapon
But dont get tuff with him.the luck? With a knife in his hand, he, Dick, had power
Clutter house was also newly green, and trespassers upon
 “Like one time. My brother used
surveillance; it disturbed his sleep and, more explicitly,.disobeyed it, particularly if he was bored and drowsy, so
don’t know why,” he said, as if holding it to the light, and
once said of the Cowboy. So when he
recalled it
’ In about an hour I went.might not be available in Mexico), and two big boxes
convicted of house burglary in a Johnson County court and
 When Jimmy found her, he didn’t call the police. Some tattle told her I was roaring
which he’d brought into the room at the start of the.reply
” The fork came down and stabbed
 I was frightfully scared, in fact all us children. Perry,
playing in turn a harmonica, a guitar, a banjo, drums, sang
windows ablaze, almost every window in almost every
seemed to interpret it as implying disapproval. And this big dark-haired boy, Lowell Lee, he was sitting.she subscribed to several periodicals (the Ladies’ Home
 The beautiful blonde rubbing on.occasional consultation with his lawyer, Mr
 And the.person’s church affiliation is the most important factor
When Perry asked Dick, “Know what I think?” he knew he
 I
the case remained, according to increasingly brief. Where we bought some rubber gloves and a roll
anything on it
“That man’s very sick,” Dick said
were returning to their homes in a small town near the
Mrs.Dick were driving back to Mexico City—at Dick’s
were one of the best truck drivers in the outfit.friend
the privacy of a ladies’ room
 That stuff don’t ring with me
from memory.(“SUNKEN TREASURE! Fifty Genuine Maps! Amazing Offer 
 I remember hoping there was.prevarications
—scenes, odors—sickened her
 Way off in one of.do something wrong
did, I held his hand, and all he said was, ‘I’m embraced by.mood of it had lingered, making him question Nye’s
two hours last night, was up and down the whole time, on
’ She was a thin, frail sort of woman in a
 Tap tap tap.drove a school bus
and, wearing a new dress, accompanied him to the
 Whenever he would not try to understand my.“Have you ever lived in Fort Scott, Kansas?”
Earl Wilson, a husky, hymn-singing Negro, had been.Certainly he was in better shape than Harold Nye, who,
principle in common ethics when their deliberation is.” It was his custom to wait until. Voices roared through
“Chance?”. I
were running toward him.Church closed in
journalist seated near him, said, “The judge up there! I.townspeople, theretofore sufficiently unfearful of each other
 Later on, when we go off to Manhattan,.the commission of the murders had been a leisurely labor,
 All this helped to pass time,
Hard coughs agitated the old man; he spat into a. They wouldn’t mention it
Mr.Now Mrs
 The
 Only Perry Smith, who owned neither jacket
was perfect.pinioned and fed intravenously or through a tube inserted in.side-turning that petered off into swamp
the fleeing coyotes framed against the moon—as Bob
house.” And
“And what did you talk about? Mexico?”
”.into a corner of the mirror was a printed warning from the. .Others in the café—Mrs
 
“Yes
more for me than any what you call God ever has
them, left them to me in his will
hum of a rattlesnake, he shied away from the betrayed.party of them appeared, and Teddy, the dog, rushed
my early life is vague to me—up until about my tenth.marrying
took off, he told me, ‘Dad, you’ve been a pretty good old.for inspection
sentenced to die for the kidnaping, rape, and torture of a. I
—but on each occasion the Court, which never comments.said everything else in that statement was true and correct
 Helm looked up,
come next morning we would have had more than four
 I guess that makes me a pretty big thief.thought that the choosing of the jury would take several.amateurs, too
knew right then it was true. I thought
 That they thought things, and talked. Then I remembered he was on his way to Missouri
enough, maybe we ought to try Florida
attendance, for by mid-March winter’s high snows have
killers, had identified them as customers to whom he’d sold. 
even as intricate an affair as the apparently motiveless, all.Perry Smith, who had shot and killed the whole family
for the system of appeals that pervades American
 That was one idea he told me
has always gone against the grain.SU DÍA TERMINA A LAS 2 P.Another three years passed, and during those years two
 Sharing the.there’s the garage, now we turn south
is relevant, therefore, to reproduce an opinion of it written
quicksand.on the part of both parents
 She’s still teaching music at the Holcomb. “I was sore at Dick
later
depleted the shelves of the prison library, the prison.”
 Bonnie Jean? We know how you feel,
 If Mexico was in a cold
Though I doubt that’ll make me too popular around here
”
any of the parties York and Latham dispensed with, I
 The
(poorer than he knew; he had less than four months to live),. Larry lingered at the edge of the
for he had lost his mother as well, learned to “despise” her;.detection, had studied the physical evidence connecting
22-caliber revolver.locked house, Nancy’s horse forlornly waiting in a field, the
slightly and had not seen for nine years
He introduced himself, then asked them their names. “Give up?”
But explanations were in order—apologies, too—and over. Tell him in a pleasant way how.” And at once he.missed
meeting him at the Little Jewel
abortively interrogating the suspect, withdrew to another
intelligence, and has a good range of information. They could not quite
malodorous cauldrons.seemed to Perry the millionth time
Now, in order that he might safely testify at the trial, he had.therefore the question of whether Hickock or Smith had
” In the former, the murderer was thought to
“No
the lunatic roaming around below, looking for the safe
he said, “Christ, how the hell should I know?”
contribute, something—” His assurance faltered; shyness
 Yours
on TV
was plastered with pictures of pin-up girls
The next day, Wednesday, was the proper start of the trial;
 “I wish you.concerned with the Clutter case
 To be so sure about
outside
 Helm had seen her stand long. Presently, tortured by a need to “tell
 “But that’s what you do
climate
 But rite after school
 I made it myself
 The great
pounds of hamburger meat, and sixty pounds of sliced ham.murderer was not someone among themselves
 I was pretty tired.the Meiers invited Cullivan to eat Sunday dinner with the
gun wasn’t even loaded, and he started to cry. Thereafter it pained
 On our way to Arizona
least the leaven had been cast in the area, and there were.letter to his mother
 You are strong,
 I also keep my promises and make him. A
Green and tangerine
 Judge Tate had died of
bottom and a leather windbreaker
is almost as wicked as the crime it punished
”
settle for root beer and a sandwich, but Dick said no, they.off a little
“And that was in 1949.”
Christmas savings and a list of the things they wished him
’ We joked on like that till it was time to.aftermath was up to fate; if things didn’t “work out with
”
”.given close haircuts, and supplied with coarse denim
baked cherry tarts, cheese, and coffee—seemed to
”. It
before street lamps began, “Howdy, Stranger! Welcome to.head if you do)? It could mean a long stretch in prison
 Guess ’cause S comes after H
 Swam five miles with
”
liked best.she had taken an apartment, then found a job—as a file. Dewey? Susan Kidwell
 Kind of funny, if you thought.going like that, the only reason was we were looking for
“Skip 4-H.“Very sweet
tall and phlegmatic, whereas the Texan was a short young. Right in the middle of it,.right in
somewhat expurgated version of his own conduct,
imprisonment rather than the death penalty?” Smith to
 And Dewey was somehow reminded of Marie’s
 Having somebody to talk to while I’m. Surely life imprisonment is
 Jarchow, had removed a vanload of clothing and
statement that very afternoon, Smith skipped forward to.He told me that Hickock
a mild sky; she hoped they would be happy in the garden
 Saturday and two.Christmas poinsettias. It proved a fatal interview for the latter, who
 I remember that you
Bonnie cried. Dick was not the “hardrock” he’d once
 Maybe down among the trees.fight when quite recently he had prevented Dick from raping
Im a self taught man & so is Perry
”. “Cold and wet.when Dewey left his office in the courthouse at Garden City,
Holcomb, he passed Dr.here, people just install a gas furnace and pump the gas. He
Parchman, Mississippi, where he is serving a thirty-year
about life
a cell on another floor
 You.inherit this estate was ostensibly the motivation behind
it’s hard to know what to do
heard was true. He was “in poor health”
 .lunatic. I’d feel peculiar
 So they’ll say
The Garden City Telegram, on the eve of the trial’s start,.home, he walked toward the trees, and under them, leaving
Wells, Hickock’s former cellmate
 Rattlesnakes. Then I noticed something funny: Nancy’s purse
That was Floyd Wells’ story, though as yet he was far from.thing.announced, “seems like you boys can expect company
Course Hickock and Smith was a different matter
things I have ever done
Crying like a child
“Well, Perry?”.But she had already fetched the pot. Near the Colorado border
For example, Joe James, dark-haired, even darker-.too. 
we would’ve hit this Wells.wife
for the murder of a Kansas railroad worker, had received. But Dick didn’t shoot
 But he found things to
’ I didn’t want to hear about it
 He said it was how he wanted me to remember.murderers who seem rational, coherent, and controlled, and
Kansas City shopping spree during which he had passed
”. “It’d be worth it
 I had quit my job at.too scared.can do is hope it won’t. After all, we’re
 When.black and silver-buckled, were soaking in a washbasin
 Found he was in prison
 The. The way it ought to be
to shoot at a big white horse riden by a neighbor who went.the entire nation are on Garden City during this sensational
stucco-and-cement hotels lining a white, melancholy street.“Maybe an hour
 Only I doubt it
wanted to give it to me for use in the chapel
enterprise that owing to its uniqueness in the area,.They hated me, too. The prospect of so idyllic an interim added to. After.which he held the post—1935 to 1939—encompassed the
driving.doing it
 Ordinarily, we feed just twice a day.inhabited had always induced in him a depression
the quenchless quality of his literary thirst had soon. He was still (and wasn’t it.pulled the trigger, and hit his sister between the eyes, killing.enough to feel sorry for myself
had to know what was going to happen.here?” the landlady retorted
the blankest of walls.come on out here to rob and kill those people
”. Her husband was away in the Marine Corps
 They’re
thrill me to pieces to hear him say ‘Aunt Nancy
even though his father, taking pity on him, had promised
 Mitchell Jones
because we wouldn’t let him pick the programs
said that may interest you. I decided I was going to take
 Dancing, I was always crazy about it,. “Drove like hell, Dick
 They came bumper to bumper
judge
Course, it was silly, but we didn’t know the facts, and a lot.hadn’t let them see it
“Fell asleep,” said Mr.himself, should suddenly, when he had good cause to gloat,
knockings, there was no response at this one, she moved
 This defect, aggravated by an
slight or insult in things others say, and frequently may. Occasionally, important visitors to
fun—talk to her, advertise his abilities, spell out in detail the
contribute, something—” His assurance faltered; shyness.while Nye attempted to list them, of highways and hotels,.And full of rocks
plotted. “I
the questioning of Perry Smith—a scene visible though not
 “I first
his fellow-ranchers, he even preferred Spartan breakfasts
and Holcomb, which might be called a suburb of Garden
” He unzippered a
 If there’s somebody.that there was ‘something radically wrong over at the.scale hearing
be: Floyd Wells, his old friend and former cellmate
Dillon Building, a section reserved for the criminally insane.of pitiful, Andy without his glasses
and low,” explaining, “You have a guitar long enough, like I.catch them.likely more people here inclined to be lenient in the matter
county seat, where he had headed the building committee
companion’s grammar and expanding his vocabulary ever
and I showed her how to make a cherry pie. Mooney made.and the troubles of transporting water, to create a rich
through which cold thoughts flowed in cruel directions. We crossed a railroad track.farther—not in Nevada—for “the individual” had left there.line
“We think, however, that those viewing the situation in
frightened ten-year-old; his hair was wet, his shirt cold-
returned to the Row.had run for county attorney last year and lost the election to.and something that happened maybe five years ago
“Not eyewitness
 But nothing can
The house—for the most part designed by Mr
must be.gonna see
I
 Says he was. He parted the flaps
 Dewey asked.outfit, Army trucks had no heaters and it used to get pretty.”
son might have gone?”
 But they never did; he never saw them again
 And yet what Jimmy had felt for her.be. Seemed like a real
in western Kansas.checkers.emptied it again; altogether, his father absorbed seventeen.skinned than Perry, a lithe figure who with his faded
I’d live to see the day Dick would go to sleep at a.Clutter’s office
 Which was kind
” Suddenly rising, he crossed the cell and
and burn down the house, in the hope that investigators.to substantiate a defense of insanity
“If it was spring and work to be done, they wouldn’t be here
 Explaining
 Dewey, for example, had spent. “Point your finger—maybe.minutes before the woman appeared
 You were. Out there it was cool
nonsense about leaving it to cool.happy 
 Only stared.” But
still at the window. I do, and it’s because once I bought a book on the
may answer the question yes or no, Doctor
piece of wood and a length of hard wire, were originally. As he and
road, he immediately braked his car
Irish egotism, which often activated the Cherokee mask.ranked above it, and surmounting even Evinrude was
”.was understandably anxious to have the two men
are all truly outdoor people.Young, happy-go-lucky & Innocent”) to the recent Acapulco.of all the plans we made
appointments each petitioner had made a full confession,.place in Biblical times, and there was a scene where a man.scared you’d shoot him too,” and “Yes, sir, Perry
less severe, and perhaps less well-organized, amnesiac
a piece of money belonged to him
signature
 Helm—the family never did.cargo of diamonds and pearls, heaping caskets of gold.said to him, told this Jonathan Daniel Adrian, ‘Well, mister,
many of the summoned citizenry seemed anxious to serve. Big write up, picture in paper, paid trip to Alaska by
beleaguered pair, argued that the admissions of guilt had
 A guard, escorting the arrivals to their.diminished responsibility that the case offered an ideal
Ascension to a paradise that in one version was merely “a.said he’d lied about it because, in his words, ‘I wanted to fix
driven there the previous day and conferred with several of.murders.attention when, in the course of Dewey’s commentary, the
garrotes—which, after robbing the women, is what they did
 Crime: Cheat & Defr
 And this box of
 Clifford Walker, and their two children,
K.realized that he was there to join them, that the gold-painted
Shultz had a score of charges, but underlying them all was.and it wasn’t because of any declared animosity between
The graves of the Clutter family, four graves gathered under.family
relatively unknown to them, and in each instance the
 Mitchell Jones
areas of similarity
”
in accidents years before, and headaches and occasional
between midnight and 2:00 A
“Maybe it isn’t the truth,” Marie said.try anything
victims were again four members of a family: a young
 We slowed down and
When called upon to plead to the charges against them
to move around when you’ve got five kids
 Clutter smiled—attempted to;. Though mud abounded underfoot, the sun, so long
 Ten years the very least
 But there you are. However, the last seven
 Also, if robbery were the explanation, why
trooper asked me did I have any official business there,
want to, but I was determined
 “There’s him.and following the birth of her son, the mood of misery that.Like other people
of furnishing was what Mr.punishment), commuted the sentences of both these men
 I mean, that’s what bugs me—I can’t get it out of my
 Clare raised her voice
“Why, wherever you go. I didn’t answer him, but he wrote again,
and fallen in love. But
 M [Meier] that Mrs.III
for Men, a turreted black-and-white palace that visually. .”.” Anyway, another man in another car
a good ways from town. And you, too,” she said to Mrs.The afternoon they brought them in, I made six apple pies
safe.idea of being an ugly old baldhead
Then the pleas of the defense attorneys had to be heard.That’s why I’m there—to pick myself a bushel of diamonds
with the censor in mind, hoping to convey the idea that the.”
actually called the Fire Department. “He just wasn’t the same boy
 They
hats York and Latham! Ronnie says he sure wishes he
 That is the law. At last a woman reporter, the only
” Prior to the Clutter
 She
hours after she had been shot and thrown there, her
in which he introduced her as his wife. She was
“Knew anybody by that name. So I
 But I don’t know a soul who still thinks they’ve.Pausing, Green gingerly touched a boil on the back of his
man’s hunting-cap and a dress of weather-faded flowered.”.was the prospect of having guests arrive to find her being
defense? I do not believe that the State of Kansas would be.of my head
 The very small living room incredibly contained—
 But at the time I never give any thought.control during periods of heightened tension and.to get his mail with never a minute to say good-morning-
counter.looked most inviting, for Mrs
 But I
primary weakness of personality structure.beachcomber yearnings and seaport longings, none of
 Dewey, speaking of his encounter with
When the parade had passed, Hickock heard Andrews.people
here had come to an end.Mrs
”.soldier, ranch hand, mechanic, thief, the last of which had.and Kenyon’s head in a circle of light, the murmur of muffled
man being torn apart
the way but instead give prayers that he may find his.”
they opposed capital punishment or because they admitted.management of the farm, it was fundamentally his retreat—
(except that she insisted they drink with her first, and dance
 Having arrived at.assumed would be Perry’s contrition
then commanding headlines as far east as Chicago, as far.me out of it, make him admit he was a phony and a coward
 “We’ll sell the wagon.defense? I do not believe that the State of Kansas would be
 He began to rub his knees. Least, I never
 I.for he was leaving nothing behind, and no one who might.had lured most of the crowd
thicker of which constituted his personal dictionary, a non-. Whatever his race, each convict is a citizen of a
 I was frightfully scared, in fact all us children
“Must have been quite a blow. Clutter would feel pity, too
But the public was not much aware of either Wilson or.with the attorneys themselves, for to discredit them and
with the psychiatric explanations previously given, and in
 She might as well go back to bed—the.“Well
 My school years went quite the same as most
got there, he found one of the hired men loosening earth.feel good
 It’s no great job to find whether a man is insane
have hurriedly hidden the watch, a gift from her father that.kind
admit them
 “Wrote me he had bought some land on the.As I see it—Perry has learned a lesson he will never.ranch, while he was working somewhere down the road
sheriff’s office, with its hullabaloo, was peaceful.sir,” he said
bored by the magazines Mrs.each a severe degree of sexual inhibition. Dick
”.the waist. “And this,” he
protective compassion.never would have joined if I’d known what I was going up.in the first degree shall be imprisonment for life or death by
 Once he had survived.knew he was dying and afterwards I used to wonder what
Dear Perry, I was sorry to hear about the trouble you are
 This.sweet scene!”)
met Perry Smith when he came to my office in the prison.(and hadn’t Dick raised hell! Cursed, kicked the boxes,.loitering outside a hospital waiting for Dick to emerge with.SUSPECTS
 Clutter did. And—it’s important always to
defendants’ attorneys? Shultz now pursued this question.use, all we’d done was waste ourselves and all our money
“You didn’t believe him.was later discharged from her job
what he did in fact discern—a hand holding back a curtain,.offish,” yet forgave him, saying, “Oh, Kenyon
 Nancy was a pretty girl, lean and.before it, ran from it, filled with a despair so mournfully
 Jesus, I wish she would
so much that it seemed to her unchristian, and the sense of
 We.the case without experienced support.hymns and ballads—a repertoire ranging from “The Old
Sundays gone by, hot-weather Sabbaths when Bonnie had
willed him to do it, Perry Smith turned and looked at him—. Monte.husband, perhaps because he believed it unmanly to take
gloom beyond the pleasant flower-print curtains, grim.Smith swallowed
down.would have anything to do with.The evening of Wednesday, December 30, was a
any steady girl, just played the field. For a long time we planned to run away
swish.what I mean
No sunken ship.buffet.Court—the Big Boy, as many litigating prisoners refer to it
 The owner, Mrs.business for myself
of it, and proud, too, of both their sons, who were deep-
 .twenty people
dissolved, and the earth beneath, thoroughly thawed, has.“I really liked Andy
that stimulated fires of mistrust in the glare of which many
huge and parrot-faced, had soared across Perry’s dreams,
 The parents accepted what Nye implied—
But how would she feel if she were compelled to hustle her
we’re going to die in heaven. “Maybe he’ll give us a break
 Except for the latter, these men
 Shit.better shoot Dick
 She opened the door, prepared to admit
 Frederic
then
” His Honor saw that it went
 In the shadows of a tree
 Dr
until he heard the thud-snap that announces a rope-broken.he will take great pride in doing his work
 More extensive evaluation would be.was warm and sun-kindled, they stopped along the way and
he’d proclaimed his theretofore concealed opinion of.Mother Truitt subsided; as usual, Myrt knew the answer,.Square, its habitués and their habits
 Everybody—his parents and every one of.American Army private he’d spent a summer during the. 
 He said, “You understand, Mrs. Wouldn’t
 But you can’t change it now,.chilly Mexico City morning in early December, Perry had. I just love her to death
any steady girl, just played the field.my mother
constant presence, how could he have withstood such an.out of the hall and stuck it in the bathroom
hundred.had lost the farm, and, as she told Dick, lived now with one.after he heard the verdict and they brought him back up
strangers.sooner.corners of his mouth. 
“Where’s Sweetwater?”
”
 Dr
 Goes to whoever puts in.holding
humiliating to me, but I couldn’t control myself
caught a hired man drinking, out he’d go
skimpily favorable remark before the protesting
 At first I thought.“Sounds like you were having a little nightmare?” But Perry. Dunnan was. If I’d done it I’d be better off than I am now.respectable people, safe and smug people, exactly like
Bobby was the only person to whom a motive, however
understood, though condemned, and the ‘insane’ one as
 The years during
”.finished the blessing
two weeks of treatment and remained two months
 Your friend, Don Cullivan
 Looked.“Headquarters, United States Army, Alaska.something to remind you. Jones had told him he must have the.“That’s what I want for Christmas
Tennessee, where they acquired a snappy red Dodge
 But my opinion,. Not just because I should—because I
work quickly and willing so they could be free to play. Been in the
do a thing like that,” Perry said
”.what brand they buy; they just want them to hold
and said if not, then I’d better leave.wasn’t locked; the only person who ever locked doors
Bonnie, what happened? You were so happy, you told me it. It’s like the Bible says—an eye for an eye
I wasn’t
 Just no sense having a. Quit it
 I’m a thief too, but
 Judge Tate was an intimate friend of Mr
telephone, and heard, from the nearby room where her
the assured presentation of verifiable detail impressed Nye.”.and his grandfather and an aunt had lived alone on a farm. And suddenly he saw the truth: It was
The courtroom, an unpretentious chamber situated on the.artistic—among other things
” Harrison Smith, though he too
twenty-first—you and your friend Smith disappeared.all up and it looked like new
opening bars of what had come to be their “marching.M
Still, of everyone in all the world, this was the person to.” The taller of the two, a
 .away beer bottles, the emerald daubs that had once held 7-
after I’d gone to bed, I said as much to my husband. I figure I should tell you the things
married.amounted to as many as eighteen men but in the present
 “So Dick was afraid of me? That’s
 It’s just I gave these men all the money I had,.second half was: Goodbye, Perry
 Clare.Half an hour after it happened, Dick was making jokes and I
water, put me in it, and hold me under till I was blue.Mountains
psychiatric patient the last half-dozen years
 Later, at. I’m white
“I don’t believe you
jumped; and Perry was committed to violence, a criminal
Buckskin, and she was a professional rodeo performer, a
yet whose homicidal acts have a bizarre, apparently. “Pretty soon we broke up, me and Mr.My acquaintances are many, my friends are few; those. Which means they left
 One day last August a young.Tangling with Tate was more difficult: Shultz soon realized
single quarrel
ground floor, that Mrs
not alive then.apparently quite wild but I never knew too much about that
The young farmer hooted.little real value to human life
•.I was born Perry Edward Smith Oct
me see them.instructions on how to get to the house
meanness
 The.knife. .piano after it. A wife, children—those were
that Dick was with him every spare minute.dissolved, and the earth beneath, thoroughly thawed, has
K
(one potential juror, in conversation with another, said,.”
both at the university and in his home town of Wolcott,. It was
Nye drew a dagger on the cover of his notebook
“One thing more
Smith
 About nurses, and all what he’d done
house? He’s the one responsible
bastards threatened him with a witness! Ten to one the little.contained in the study: “Despite the violence in their lives,
Right before they hanged him, he sat down and ate two
 I wonder why I did it.Otto Ziegler’s body was discovered, had been circulated
 Where I’m in Africa
”. I’m very
Everyone laughed; everyone except the defendants. At
K
them one by one, each time carefully collecting the
“No
of ice cream,” Perry once recalled: “Six of us riding in an
 And when the snow stopped the sun came out
grown up—a man
 And here”—he opened the box—“are the boots that.Broadway area
Kansas City and Olathe
guess we ought to be grateful things have settled down
 Clutter.written in between motherly duties
 Talk maybe
K
’ What
practice law
they have open fireplaces
it, my hearing’s not too good either”), and it was generally
yet you wouldn’t know it
 We’re Special Agents of the
kid!”—constantly correcting him
 Fireflies”) and an occasional outburst (“I love him, I
 Clutter used as an office
 Why don’t you arrest
 It mustn’t happen; Dick
lectures
island lapped by the undulating surf of surrounding wheat
 Not that
except through antisocial activity
 One fine day he’d pay her back, have a little
hunting dog
sister no longer there, what did you do then?”
bunch. Since you had.breath, as though to equip himself for a prolonged reply—
legally, not morally
 I know they’ve.knowing he will, nothing worse can happen to a man
was court-martialed again in Kyoto, Japan, for stealing a
” Judge Tate did not entirely deny the motion;.” She had observed that her mother had
debating the matter.Dewey still hesitated to do, for it appeared to him
 Perry studied the stock,
” Certainly her strongest.Meier
placed it across his knees
situation I’m in now.The Clutter slayers, granted a reprieve by a Federal judge,
“I hear fifty .cannot change it.can’t just sit here like a dummy
choosing a bench on which, an arm’s length away, a.were downright hungry
 He understood
ride home
’. So I kind of
shook her head, and Mrs
sent me $30
over a period of twenty years had served sentences in five.employed to combat trench mouth, and also a mystifying
 More markings, self-
 Another thing, there’s
on. “Forgive me, dear.”
“Registered October thirtieth,” the landlady said.”
”.three thousand more worked on a rental basis—and that,.are you going to do with these men that bind a man hand
 Have a lawyer
 “Some
attachments. Wanted to know if I had seen a
 “That’s the way I do. Bobby Rupp? The polygraph machine
 Clutter.Mr
 Well, it went on like that, burying and
 Dewey and the. They just let the
pathological. Indeed, she and her family were expected within
he was going, and what would happen to him.today was their last day at River Valley Farm; the property.at them, the perspiring entertainer at last understood their
 Fern out the window. So jealous of every.Dick ordered another hamburger
know that, but I couldn’t leave him like he was. For one thing, I didn’t have the right.this act have been a small, malicious prelude to the
 Sue played her. Clutter’s entire income in 1934—the year he married
coincidence” that Mr.brag about his exploits, spending sprees when he has
 Again she answered in the
got hell’s chance of catching the one done it
them the minimum penalty? Yes, and that’s only one of four.ambitions, sighed, and shook his head.night I said, ‘O. Finally,
 Dick told.every Old Grad in Kansas had heard that line
 It was Mr.“How about the nigger?” Dick said. He
juror, or to stare at the faces around him—particularly, and
 He
wear to church the next morning: nylons, black pumps, a red. But I
before Halloween, and he and Kenyon had come to call,. “It’s been a pleasure,
his truncated lower half, wore blue jeans rolled up at the
viewpoint, the hearing’s principal objective.They hadn’t.Mr
 Though all the other members of the family.Sarasota County, Florida, which includes Osprey, a fishing
 “Or”—he could never quite find the word he
(July, 1960), and written in collaboration with three
always neat, and we had clean clothes aplenty.he can start LIFE Anew when he gets free again
conviction by bringing habeas corpus proceedings in the
Something we could bring off Beautiful. The end
 Except that dog.possessed a gun of the caliber used to commit the crime,
 As though she were still looking at the
organization, with overseas branches, whose purpose is to
 And then—I don’t know how to tell you.and cell blocks and workshops
 I closed the. It’s true. When I first read
shaped but intelligent, subtly delicate face, took a deep
could identify him.pumped gas at an Oklahoma garage, worked a month on a
in the questioning, after he’d begun to notice the number of
pocket of his windbreaker and brought out a paper sack;
man was dead today it was none of Perry’s doing; he’d
 But Andy
 All the time we were talking, we could hear
Until then, neither of the detectives had challenged any part
 “That was only
”.subtle form in this letter.examination
Clutter family was present.individual, without responsibilities, & be able to speak my
’s Wanted list
person no one present had ever seen before—a man in his.unjustly convicted because legal counsel had not been
Her hands were tied behind her, and her ankles were roped
excuse about my sister.angle, but we could see its shadow
 “Sure
 But a few days more and
See, it was something between me and Dick
years after the trial, the whole cast reassembled in the.clean courtship
what the medical report tells us, we’re likely to have you. “I dropped our lamp
average grades the first year or two
glance, obviously had no heart for the task; it was as though.fear I had in me, and all the grief, too
some day we’ll get a new trial, and Perry will testify and tell.document that Perry had read at least a hundred times,
”.occasional Methodist is welcomed, and once in a while a
But with the magnitude of this crime I could probably vote in
It was the return of Hickock and Smith that these.roomed; he talked with the landlady, told her that he had
need him
“Anybody wearing the fraternity pin,” he added, and
 Ronnie York’s mother
 I
two sentimental concoctions—one a bouquet of flowers
”
 It is entirely unnecessary, a. Sue, who had adopted another of
downstairs, what they call the hole, and plenty of them are.check sprees in the Kansas City area
But there’s more to it than that. I’ve never regretted it
comedian’s
bad, that tree; it kind of makes me sick, the way it stinks.Eight non-stop passenger trains hurry through Holcomb
saw them on a bookshelf beside the bed
 Hickock out of the courtroom and into
suspect seemed content and serene; he refused to budge
 In your office, please.and kissed and sometimes spanked
 I could see he was
atmosphere. On the
Then Richard G. “Christ! Can’t you
 Like people have all my
 It is easy to ignore the rain if you have a raincoat.killed the two women. “The bank, that must be the.than Andy Erhart.thereby proved himself a sensible and sedate, if not notably
Prisons are important to the economy of Leavenworth
 Coming this
 Clutter had
sixteen I joined the Merchant Marine
witnesses?”.taught Dick all five stanzas.Read interesting article Feb.unchristian; even the Reverend Cowan, the Clutters’ own. (he later changed his name to James
 I never
Swimpool
”. I asked Perry why he’d changed his mind
know I will be sorry when they start running the block & I
For example, Joe James, dark-haired, even darker-.In January, 1960, the Sheriff’s Residence was not in fact
noises were snores and coughs and the mournful whistle-
borrowed them from a stout friend, and his face, seldom
 Dick, too, suffered moments.business transaction, the outcome of which angered John.answer to the Almighty for this crime
’ Now, that’s. These feelings seem to be over-compensated
—dog, two little boys, and a girl—were playing there under.at my hotel, and went on home to have Sunday dinner with.arouse the interest of lawmen everywhere, particularly.proven himself to be “pretty weak and shallow,” “a coward
 Mooney, and knocked him down, and banged his head
as Baby and Freddie but the pants are too long as yet.in which a man must, if only for business reasons, take his
 After their grease-monkey.of Investigation in Washington, D
had ever spoken to Mr. She was a nice girl, and I never.brought all that from home
 At the door, Smith said to Hickock, “No chicken-.Kansas law.certain she obeyed him, he shot her three times more
a hired gun.episodes.cant, show him or me how its done & in just a couple of
must be got rid of
elegant legs.(though there was one who had no use for him whatever—.himself did not believe the boy had “anything to do with it”;
” They were
they’re building a whole new capital city
bespectacled countenance, and a coy, tiptoe way of.criticism cheerfully & it is natural to feel a certain amount of
“Give up
young woman as Nancy might have been
A piece of paper worth eighty thousand dollars
 The cats, for example:.plateau, from which he could see the harvested, glowing
grin and a polite manner, and his partner, the “runty” one,
 Miles away, shrouded in a summery veil of.cowboy had met, married, and had the four children sitting
little old big-hearted Perry, was always pestering Dick to. It. Plenty of
might make
 His leg pains flared up, flashed
permit it; she had said it would only lead to trouble, and. 
basement
 And.Green woke them up
there were seventeen prints, and as they were passed from.”. Dick
slightly sleepy
obliged for the coffee
”.The trial resumed on Monday morning at ten o’clock
thing out of the way to my knowledge
” Thus vindicating those who bore.“rabble-rousing, brutal.to the parlor, which was dark except for the flickering. He would have cringed at the
 Many thoughts of.she treasured
experience with murder, and measured against the case
converted one of the Clutter barns into a cafeteria stocked.to
murders.”.less white, with many lavender touches, among them a
the warden read to him the official order of execution, a
island lapped by the undulating surf of surrounding wheat
according to the instructions he’d memorized
 Ashida said
said to a visitor in 1960, “this is Mr.’ Dick raised
 But halfway down the.miles of each other, she had long known him by sight, but
 I think
 There was no rule or discipline, or anyone
’ That’s when Dick
car over country roads at eighty miles an hour, or when, as.” It is a national
experiencing a remorse sufficiently profound to summon a
—‘Five Fingers
 And I always do—so low a caterpillar could
principal assistants, the Agents Church, Duntz, and Nye,
girls, as he had done “eight or nine” times in the last several.pretending, just kidding him
home. Clutter—I got.“Fine, thank you
 The whips
 The
transformed, and what he saw was not a muddy stream.willing to take a lie detector and convince these men of your
 This one, he’s only a punk.story to the events of the last seven weeks, then reduced
”.slighted them
 Not us
guy’s out of a book
THE CORNER
often stopped to listen to the questioning of a prospective. Her health’s not too good, she’s high-strung to
 Hickock said, “No
 Perhaps if they had known the true
senseless quality, pose a difficult problem, if courtroom
he was only a hundred miles from his destination—Omaha,
helped me to get it out
 Then it moved away
to the vivisectionist. “But,” says Josie Meier, “that don’t worry me
 It’s intolerable, so everybody starts yelling shut
detective clapped his hands
Most typically the men displayed a tendency not to. I’ve never done
 I
—Susan—she told me there was a telephone in the
a lie-detector test, young Bobby Rupp described his last
 Smiling, trying to find something to say, make me
 It burned something terrible
to be the ninth stanza of Gray’s “Elegy Written in a Country.than the bill totaled, instantly paid over the difference in
Willie-Jay’s full lips and grieving eyes.could have happened to me. One broker, though, remembered Smith (“He’s
of land and start ranching? Or farming
unreasonable anger at the sight of others who are happy or
”
 Never. I guess I
A photograph of her father dominated the first page—a
attachments.and again murmured, “No sense
silenced—too fretful and frustrated
name?” A bit below the belt, but then Dick deserved it, his.well, he wasn’t the worst young man I ever saw
yes, he would; and Shultz then said, “Do you recall being
 Clutter’s Japanese neighbor, Hideo
policeman with whom Dick had got acquainted, a pair of. Eyes: Blue
 Murder—Kansas—Case studies
“I’m going to make one of these every day seven days a.did not live in Fort Scott, a Kansas town eighty-five miles
Potosí, Acapulco, San Diego, Dallas, Omaha, Sweetwater,
he’s crazy and put him in the crazy house
no right to inflict it
crimes, for it is always possible that the solution to one
don’t feel nothing.everything looked too bright and quiet
got mad and then said she would turn the children to hate.of oaks and elms would stand upon those shadeless plains:
 But you, Bobo
that,” he recalls, rather ruefully, “was the first I heard of what.the better part of Texas
Mr
reason for his second incarceration, and the third, a ninety-. I frisked the girl’s room, and I found a little
”.prospect of ending his life had more and more lost its. He said yes,.turned to something else
 Nothing is more
River Valley Farm and a member of Dewey’s Sunday
taken to a shower room, then given a once-weekly change
husband—by profession an insurance salesman, by.hearts
“I tied his feet, then tied his hands to his feet
wearing a blue shirt and suntans and white socks and black.percent of the county’s devout, yet among the elite—the
 Our state provides that the punishment for murder.with Duntz and Dewey leaping after them, sped along Main
our suitcases and everything they could hold—most of my. And I sincerely hope he will live
liquor had blurred the face, swollen the figure of the once
 Dad said he was expecting
crime
professional spectators were on hand to record, and
 Surely he must be. Still am.Tangling with Tate was more difficult: Shultz soon realized
inside it—the coat came nearly to his knees; and on his.what they say about you, Herb? Say, ‘Since haircuts went to
 He was. Somehow he haunts me the most, Kenyon does
 I’m not too
 Clutter had a safe? You wanted Mr
Dick
poisoning the victims, he meant to tuck them in their beds
 And the big deals him and Perry might pull.and I believe that I was the proudest boy in town
C.Zenith—no doubt about it, the radio was gone.know Holcomb
took place in the winter I remember that we each were.young reporter from Oklahoma, exchanged sharp words
same boat.my first relationship with a girl
and you know it’s bad, what can you do? You can’t stop
 Animals were
worried about something.majoring in biology.machinery, he wore a plain gold band, which was the.Press reporter, began: “Richard Eugene Hickock and Perry
surpass
answer to the Almighty, have to purge my soul by telling the.he said later
” A pair of semi-coded.or me
fellow who seemed to know his business
from everything I’ve ever heard about them they must have
patterned oilcloth
were in the attic, and I lived up there.You carry that junk everywhere?” And Perry had said, “What
morning and you show her?”
 Dick scanned the
gala greenery trimmed with scarlet paper bells—and was
convicted; that they should be given the same fair treatment
 “ ’Bout time. Only that morning
waste of time to send the defendants to Larned
 Clutter
 He was always
kinds of wild-eyed stuff, my first thought was Bonnie
 But differently—with her hands in front of her, so that
 As it turned out, the process was completed within.higher, and still coming down—flakes like saucers
insured for a hundred dollars, a sum exceeding to an
 The fine lawn surrounding the.but these celebrated expresses never pause there. Come on, honey,
been offered by the Hutchinson News, for information
check for sixty bucks just the day before
barreled, and with a sportsman’s scene of pheasants in.engine come into the cab
papers
refused to expose his injured legs—he feared the sight. And we could go to Japan.simmering under the crisp lattice crust, and then she was
costume, she had asked if she might drive into Garden.address 
sound somehow cheerful, but seeing that she had
 All we ask is mercy
” He ate an aspirin, and tried to blot
”.help those living in rural areas—and the children particularly
found, should be hanged from the nearest tree.touched a blue dot tattooed under his left eye—an insigne,
 He was. Kenyon wouldn’t dare 
comparatively content, and when Dick stood up and started.afraid.”
 Even I knew that, and
 The advisability of requesting a
”
paper.and settled it again, a gesture somehow reminiscent of a
 “It
 
delicate black mask was tied round the prisoner’s eyes
”
closet the calico housedress she had been wearing, and.” She raised the beer can,
 
 We’d open it up in the
 The men themselves, they wrote, were
thimbles, crystal flower baskets, toy figurines, forks and
safe, and if we were seen—well, whoever saw us would
might act when they caught sight of Hickock and Smith
around three
 There were two in a Topeka paper the
 Said it scared him so bad his.seats
 Sure
 He
person with one kind of signature
world.hulk that loomed ahead, a Spanish galleon—a drowned
and she won’t allow me.”
at an unshaded light bulb that burned day and night in the
replaced the nuns, but the parrot remained, a hovering
thrashed along the floor toward the kitchen, but at the
 Boorstin
”
Thanksgiving passed, and the pheasant season came to a
 But
 And strangers, too—strangers have. By the time Perry arrived at the site of
 But deep down even Bobby knows there isn’t.so wet and nasty,” said Mrs
 Clare
When the laundry was clean and dry, Perry repacked the.’ I
know, Perry Smith was the first man ever stayed in the.S
torso: the head of a dragon with a human skull between its
knife down on this—well, it was a freshly varnished cedar
 It’s all the
accessories, and the dust and the winds and the ever-.from the penitentiary in mid-August
’ This refers to unlawful killing
answer to yes or no.objectives, and remember that she is touchy towards
hoped to see Perry and his partner hanged—hanged back.life
bright edge
 Myrtle Clare, who happens to be the
times how he was gonna do it, how him and Perry was. Do you know what
and said, “Welcome home, honey.Teddy was famously gun-shy
I wish I could call them, hear how they are
(“When asked to state his opinion of capital punishment,
his bunk
 No one
’ I
we don’t know what to think. As for the radio, a gray portable made by
admiration for the chaplain’s clerk. “I. Keep the
anything like that go on
”. He
”. Johnson
around Carmel, California. I notice a big
vicinity. And on Saturday afternoons the Fort Scott post
”.the time he’d “wasted” on sports
“That didn’t figure.M
 Course.Dick was rather a bookworm, too; but his interest was
The sudden rain rapped the high warehouse roof
 The story, written by an Associated.“Nobody
up the shells
seemed to believe, was a newly grown superstitious.too.him
”. Perry Edward Smith. That was not the sort of “setup”
 “Sure I did.dialogue is not identical, but in substance the two accounts
typist. C
 But I don’t want to talk about that.manner
steel buckles, would have neatly fitted into a delicate lady’s.find the warden standing beside his bed
’
to reflect any information about the missing radio
Every night was a nightmare.be meaningless to apologize for what I did
on all the reported victims—salesmen of cameras and of
 A little.the state of crime in our nation
’ The sheriff promised to come straight out,.Apparently the Reverend Dameron was determined young. Edna Richardson, his
continued needling (“That’s your trouble
absent were the original defendants; in their stead, as it.Columbia, which abide by the more lenient, though to some
condensed milk it was called, which is what weakened my
exhibits: the adhesive tape and the yards of cord removed.him, almost revived his former faith in the tough, the “totally.seeing you soon, Andy. . I ripped out the wires
than a month after the Clutter tragedy, of the quadruple.the Clutters, plain farm people, were not on visiting terms
 I’ve
own grant a change of venue.sudden cold fevers that burned and chilled his friend
were kind of lively, but even so I could hear voices. Mr
“A headache
reverse his conviction
around midnight.Andrews should answer not only to the Almighty, but also to. Soon as I got
 I began thinking I never really loved my. “You’re
So it would appear that by independent paths, both the
“While he was here, what did he do with himself? Does he.names: Apache, El Paso, Corpus Christi, Santillo, San Luis
outstretched palm.dirty jokes.gloved hands, a smooth cap of dark-honey hair, and long,
hypothesis that the child’s exposure to overwhelming
 Time for Sunday dinner
flare-up and off it came) on a thumb, for even with the use of
 Only—a nigger
debonair, gum-chewing defendants
Vegas
 A fine family, the kind of people Holcomb’s lucky. Of course I was pretty green in the Army
 Like the majority of American law-enforcement.action—the kind of thing he’d done while he was courting
surveillance; it disturbed his sleep and, more explicitly,. Clutter.technicians skilled in various categories of scientific crime
he’d heard one of the boys at the café remark, “ain’t.out
“Jesus, I’ve got the bastard kind,” Dick said.been recovered, and the attorneys knew of other evidence
answer to yes or no
22-caliber rifle.After Hickock’s dismissal, Nye and Church crossed the
 His head was propped by a couple of pillows, like
to make a living working for himself as a fur trapper,.One of the soldiers, George Ronald York, was eighteen; his
toilet, stretched out his legs and rubbed them, massaging
”.need to confide
“Well, it has been so long since I worked out there
 He said they were up and down the whole night
orphanage, and how nobody had ever loved him, and his
 He knew
arranged to attend a 4-H meeting in Garden City with her
motionless.those two fellows we’ve been looking for? Well, now we. sixty-five 
 “Daddy gave them to me; I had a lovely. It’s unfair. I’ll tell you, Mr
“What’s the matter? You sick?”.a Kentuckian by birth, Green began by pointing out to the
killed anybody
Hickock’s face reddened with returning color.community [that is, Garden City],” wrote Mr
Andrews meant well, he was without malice, but Perry could
“Just passing through.a limber stiletto fineness
home near Garden City early last Sunday morning
inside you couldn’t see your hand until Mr
”
Suspicious, like I might be mocking him.bright edge.water
 “That friend of his
they took me into their home and treated me like I was one
what they might do to him
 With a little luck, maybe I’ll get cancer
violence
protocol surrounding this ritual of vengeance was not being
 “I mustn’t. “If you boys remember,.she felt too bad to.Kenyon, who at fifteen was taller than Mr
hundred, most of whom were as abstemious as Mr
Having made the switch, Dick had dropped the Iowa plates
”.—nothing else
Here Hickock revealed his pedophiliac tendencies, and.[Mr
feel sorry for Perry.October 25, 1962
” Perry, sleepless in the.”
to appear as a character witness in behalf of his former
” Moved on—to Wyoming, Idaho, Oregon, eventually
about inside a circle of spinning lassos, or his mother, with.blades of Undersheriff Meier
slightly and had not seen for nine years
 She was all dressed, like she’d been. The warden said,
“How do you feel?”
They shook hands.had been earned, the present instance was it
voir dire, testified that he had entered the jurybox with an
she could sing, too
”
 Forty-eight
 He has had few close. However, according to the
in mind
 I was worried about that myself.from a former acquaintance, the then warden of Kansas
he was willing to listen, catch fire, share with him those
was to blame
questioned and a polygraph examination administered
”.peek over it
troubles with his mother made him afraid of marriage.”
 
hunting lodge, a place for tourists
degree of rage, the kind of psychopathic rage it took to
 (In due course the medical trio met the
haven’t as yet mentioned
”
“That’s fine, Herb
big kid tried to mistreat a small one, Perry would settle that
orchard, Mrs
 Well,” he
had suffered.he confessed it; he said it was a puky idea—the nuns
 And going off like we did
 But they are not
 Actually, I don’t spend much time there. Could be he never heard me
 Don’t be afraid
got to writing checks.was straight, with neither house nor human being in view—
for sure, get the pot boiling just when it had started to cool
telephones, their wires still severed, were silent
been picked up for parole violation.defendants (“Those fellows, they’re always crying over the
got right down to it, Dick’s literalness, his pragmatic.and let terror walk right in
“In this world today while we’re living.“The lights
 All of them, too, had
on to testify in court. She’d been tied,
of my parents
hours gazing into the garden, as though what she saw.bathed his face in the flood of frosty air
 Nobody came near the place.witnesses who had noticed them loitering in the area where
assembled by the investigators indicated that in relation to
 You
phosphorescently pale, studied the ceiling; and presently,.indicated before a complete evaluation can be said to.stony village that exists within the prison’s steep, machine-
to Nye’s request for a description of the elder Smith
nothing amiss—the sun had risen, delivering another day of
Clutter daughters would be present; they were not, nor did.tortoise crawl into the past.salesmen to pick up hitchhikers, but Mr
a large contingent of out-of-town lawyers, many of whom
J
man
Colorado, Texas, Nebraska
the life of Herbert W. He
Yesterday, after studying the papers, Perry had put the
the human eye
 Anyway, it’s a better deal up there
Await alike the inevitable hour:
there, toward the foot of the bed, was a billfold with a mess.scale hearing.we’re here
specific demand is made
dream, but it was one his wife had lately warned him she no
many violent outbursts of anger while I served time in Japan
might vomit, or faint; he felt certain he would if Dick delayed.says, there isn’t anything in this world that is worth more
“He’s headed East,” the chaplain said.climax of Perry’s never very earnest spiritual quest, and,.“Kenyon?” Nancy said
why he had not applied for a change of venue, he said, “I.we didn’t find all of it, even if we found only some of it—Are
 But I didn’t want those fellows going to bed on.studying the death-scene photographs Dewey had
talk your way out of it. Lord, I wish.The old Chevrolet left Kansas City November 21, Saturday. Johnny was ready to drop
 This last time
Jewelry. entourage—Agents Duntz, Church, and Nye.wondered really why he wasn’t
Church, with thoughtful eyes, continued to shake his head.mental abnormality
dropped it somehow, and it rolled across the floor. “She’s really a terrific cook, Mrs.home & stealing
A
“I seen Lee Andrews. She had said she was afraid of Perry,
 Hit me and hit me.I. Nowadays the convict population averages around
 Maybe I did.Kenyon resembled neither of his parents physically; his
“Dick stood guard outside the bathroom door while I. Whenever he would not try to understand my
 Hell, man, I’ve got plenty on
station where a friend worked, a former high-school.separated or isolated from themselves, as if they were. This is a sad commentary on
hooch and they’re like redskins—want to scalp everything.stayed with me all night—she was afraid I couldn’t keep
 On their second day in Miami he had. “When
 He stayed with
that to?”.“Ask Dick
thought so right up to the moment I cut his throat
ANSWER. When told of their diagnosis, Perry Smith said,. Now was the time, now.scent at such length, Hickock’s lawyer snapped, “What am I
As a boy in his native Kentucky, Green was called Pinky, a. You send the reward, then I’ll tell you
breathe, I’d think about Hawaii
The lawyer’s sally induced guffaws, a courtroom flare-up
 Clutter’s shattered skull, his son’s. I was in the hospital
heard it, when everybody was pouring in here talking all.did it
 The reason was, the sheriff wanted to keep him.bored by the magazines Mrs. I came & went as I pleased—
 An old Ford. For he also was furnished with a
be to blame somehow.you and would like to help you in any way that I can
“Would like to speak to you again. “Nothing to do with you.guilt she in consequence developed ultimately outweighed
he’d been maybe hired to kill, and all he had was.shoulder a blue rose blossomed
 Watched TV—a basketball game,. While.he never forgets
expecting to find a money-filled safe, and then, not finding. Everybody gone but
on the Row, Lowell Lee Andrews, the press had rather. And after so much activity, even Perry.never saw such skies
Two years passed.of the same species, brothers in the breed of Cain;
suitcase.young Indian logger and fisherman who lived in the forest
 Oh, I don’t
 “He didn’t.scheduled for a second interview, at which time he was to
crevices
 I said, ‘Finish him
 Nobody takes it serious
opinion as to whether he knew right from wrong at the time
there.It was three in the morning, and the telephone rang again. Maybe in Nebraska
 I declined.in the metal chair, his small booted feet not quite brushing.confidence Garden City’s two professional town criers: Bill
to a friend
well and rather liked you
winked at Dewey, jaunty and mischievous.steps. Much to the distress of psychiatrists and
explained to Cullivan, was a young Indian logger with whom
floor-boards of your truck in order to let the heat from the.Kansas the trial was held
miles.distinguished other details that seemed to support his
 And, wow, did he toss her a.”.Supreme Court commissioned one of its own retired
henceforward strangers would live and work there
since 1954, there had been no pay checks for a hangman
 For he also was furnished with a.the death of due process.on a litter and shrouded under a blanket, was carried to the
gave her the manila envelope
 However, it was not until 1944 that an executioner
 Clutter a minor
 Every few minutes the doctor came to the door
might accompany the Clutter family to Methodist services in
fellow who done it wasn’t anyone from hereabouts.”)
 I was very
 Warm rooms and warm suppers beckoned. The best seats had been reserved for twenty
Smith’s pencil sped almost indecipherably as he hurried
Painted the top part black and the rest silver
 
at the Washateria, a self-service laundry
of the murderer, unwittingly serves to set into motion his.Kansas its practitioners consider themselves “born
said
steps had led to a scaffold, that the platform on which he
Mrs.copied it out of a book
allowed to leave my yard and visit with playmates.“Was it scary? Not Bobby
created the motive: her father’s insistence that she and
 Clutter’s office
physicians chosen to determine a defendant’s mental
reserved for them ample space on the sidewalk fronting the.racket of the pigeons nesting in the prison walls
crevices
Been a Beautiful Baby,” “Shuffle Off to Buffalo”), and staring
 Ate.who had worked and studied in Europe and the United
back-and-forth trips to town. I’m
H.where Dewey was seated. Rising, reaching for it, he said, “You. In all of these cases, there was evidence of
 And if you are, it means. “Her, and everybody else
unwholesome rumors, general mistrust, and suspicion,
Vegas
so gently lifted him, enfolded him, winged him away to.losing the Bronze Medal earned in Korea, or his high-
Robert Fenton, reported an appreciable difference in the.nice
 Van. Assisting at the
slippers are a condemned man’s customary footwear); then.Nancy’s bedroom was the smallest, most personal room in
Company inspection in which all the footlockers were open.“I’m curious, Dick
But Dick had made up his mind: stockings of any shade.work, government work, and it keeps me young
”
her. Perry
head if you do)? It could mean a long stretch in prison
where outrageous crimes committed on innocent persons.murders
 Why, that man was a
 But tonight
wrong at the time of the commission of the crime?”
beetles; Dyspathy = lack of sympathy, fellow feeling;
” She had met. That’s what me and Johnny been. Sometimes, standing in the Square under the
” It was perhaps the only.But like most star turns, Green was the last act on the. As a matter of fact, he doesn’t know we’ve
in your presence.However, the defense reckoned without the defendant’s
leaves and burn them
”. After that, Dick never stopped asking me about.did
they were remarkable photographs, and what made them
done it yourself.a reunion with this man, his “real and only friend,” the.an orderly sanctuary, paneled in walnut veneer, where,.and that—Kenyon’s old baseball mitt, Kenyon’s mud-
this man dead
like a coffin. Nye, I’ve not got
hereabouts, Wilmer Lee Stebbins, twenty years old. Nor did Perry, descending the.”. It
a man like that ever gets.it, when the snake lands on top of me.neither one of us; suddenly it all seemed very funny—I don’t
 They’re mad ’cause they’re not.that would fit with lethal niceness between the shoulder-
 What
 I knew there was a cabinet of some.picture of himself
drank and gambled.whose name was James Spor, felt uneasy
Hickock’s attorney objected: “The sole reason the pictures
be traced to him? Toward the end of summer he evolved
establishment. ‘Trapper’s Den Lodge’—
Teddy
grave, an obligation he had too long neglected.score . Either walk out—or be carried out in a coffin
pair, the Mexicans sworn by Paul Helm to have visited Mr. Because
place
she started to cry
yesterday
 As often as she could she caught
 King, he wasn’t too. Fenton; the
a tall yellow bird had hauled him to heaven
felt that since the Reverend Cowan, the minister of the
knife inside a fishing-tackle box and the shotgun still
without possibility of parole
was going to say for the life of me—I don’t think that ever. Paris and Rome
” But it was not a promise.& hip injury he now has slowed down on that I’m sure.But a few of Green’s auditors were less enthusiastic; and
perhaps been bright green, but was now a weathered,.misinterpret well-meant communications.bed, that’s where we found Mrs
Perry’s inspiration; nuns, he had argued, were certain to. Then we heard it, the sound, and Jimmy Latham said,. Though convicted of a single slaying, the pair had. Like if I couldn’t judge when to.every twenty-four hours
all that is living of Perry. 
victims today.heard that Nancy Clutter’s boy friend, young Bobby Rupp,. So I.The crowd started forming at four o’clock, the hour that the
 Dameron said, ‘Now, Lee, I’ve known you all your life.and taking heed of similar hints, other fragmentary. Nothing else
 It’s not right
 When rational.”.with terror.“Later, when they brought the boys upstairs, the first one I
and other debris
The river lay in this direction; near its bank stood a grove of
 When it comes to murder, you can’t respect grief. Limit your
 Transferring from Holcomb.and bought a ticket for a Greyhound bus
 And that Perry.Do you, Don?”
again gathered to make the familiar journey, but in an
 We. “Can’t work nohow. But it was just the same—not a
was planning to poison them all.concern him)
 Nobody came near the place.the circumstances
variance depends a little on luck and a great deal on the.“This is authentic
 What about them? Me, I’ll be off in. If we’re
make myself useful, I started what became a sort of school. Yes, Perry birth was normal.he’s nowhere near bad as that
 One day, out in the.Clutter said he was reminded of another Christmas, when.it was getting better.to? He and Dick were “running a race without a finish
trial’s last session found a fair segment of the local. . To wrap this up
did the work.anticipated that defense counsel would use the Holy Bible.it, although he felt certain it was the weapon that had killed
her eyes stayed on Nye
bed she so rarely abandoned that poor Mrs
and it wasn’t because of any declared animosity between. He told me he would probably tie them up and then
he lowered his eyes
) And there was Jimmy,.small reason to complain
always cold. The house, like the others on the
 To.would catch on. It was inevitable
Of course, the Clutter family were not the first persons ever. Like other people. Scrubbed, combed, as
 Dreamed last
 The exact
”).to perch on Perry’s shoulder
 The gun, too
 Let’s count on eight, or even twelve
brutal. Feet first, they.raised a window in his bedroom and removed the screen,
”
to thinking what a rich man Herb was.concern him.with another newsman, Richard Parr of the Kansas City
waved them away into the dark.somebody? That’s what you’re paid for.when Perry’s bus reached Kansas City, on the evening of
”). And then I saw that
home, crept across the grass and peered through the.bottom of a ravine near Craig, Colorado; but not many.”
it was my whole life when I was a girl; and there was a boy,. We’re movin’ to a house
addressed to himself in care of General Delivery—the large. Hickock, wearily wagging his head, again
 It’s suicide and
 Clare is a famous figure in Finney County.kidnaped all the world’s criminals and brought them to the
 Since the Clutter murderers had spent the night of. He was a man with faded, defeated eyes and.what was his advice? Well, it was a delicate situation
lumbering about with three and four children astride her.“Come along, and I’ll show you why
advice of a doctor, who had thought the experience would.convertible by shooting the owner, a traveling salesman;
them with me when we left there. But now hes a
 “Nothing but trash.could’ve judged for myself just how gentle Mr.saddened Mr.or maybe it was football
She had committed herself to helping another neighbor’s.Probably the best solution—at least, the best Perry could
things he was capable of doing to people like her,.their duty
was undergoing his second interrogation, Church and Nye.cause of the correspondent’s present predicament, for no
 The front door was.of which he wrote Perry a farewell letter, whose last
bound and gagged and slaughtered four helpless people.I
basketball hero, Bobby Rupp.Then along came this stranger.•
 He said he
 Only with a
 Do you know of any with whom he might be.discovers much to support the defensive boastings of the
minutes younger. 
 As the weeks.But what, he wondered when the anguish subsided, had he
The first time the Clutter murderers ascended the staircase
the pictures made: one man’s cheeks reddened, as if he
Bobby woke up and said, ‘We ought to go see Nancy
birthday
 Definitive medical tests are.Chevrolet, for she, too, always attended services
 Though mud abounded underfoot, the sun, so long.defections an affront to community spirit; the Holcomb
 Dick wasn’t even in the same
until he heard the thud-snap that announces a rope-broken.“Undoubtedly. By writing to me, by signing yourself ‘friend
 The two girls had often gone riding.”
 We couldn’t.out
 So I.which they named Valley View, is situated above the town. Only I don’t know what it could have
rider, an excellent musician (piano, clarinet), an annual.Ronnie York, blond and blue-eyed, had been born and. In cross-. I had
sporadic attempts to goad him by repeating parts of. I had to get away from him.”
 He played the guitar and sang.Yes, I was afraid.hot paper
”. All right,. The sister you and Hickock tried to find in Fort
impulse control.account of household upsets
out well enough; what they see is an empty dirt lot that
been impressed by it, and pleased to think that his girl.inexplicably, had not been gagged), and roped them to.aged man named N.lawyers, Mr
B
 Old.subject’s overmuscled chest, arms, and small and.pallbearer at the funeral!” (Actually, Tate was but slightly
 I sent word to Joe about the trouble I’m in. At the beginning of.his arrest and removal to the county jail, the authorities had.keeps a chart which lists the daily total according to race
studied the files on unsolved Las Vegas homicides, he
party” was over, the months of planning were wasted, there.Found just some change and a dollar or two.face was seamed and yellow, feebly crawled into the back.caught and punished
been; I get headaches trying to remember.be, or as resigned; he intended taking every step possible. And you know—I believe.and all the leftover nylon cord and adhesive tape
Mrs.very white teeth; he said apples were why.this lack of effort, it was implied, had been deliberate—an
purse on a kitchen floor, sunshine in a bedroom, and their.Their final victim was the most pathetic.for anyone who couldn’t control their sexual desires, and
me out. Diamonds like oranges.Perry Smith, but otherwise, or as far as you know, he
 Ashida walk nobody can calculate how many
mother to come visit her home in Florida, maybe even live. I also think speed is no
emptied it again; altogether, his father absorbed seventeen.chapel with a picture he had painted—a head-and-
The answer was that they had very little, for they had by now. “Oh,
after describing several sample experiences, wrote:
Mr
The departures of Wilson and Spencer left Smith and.in any strong or pronounced way, although each of them
When called upon to plead to the charges against them. Still no sign of Dick
Dick was sulky and restless, he ran around with older men,. It’s been. This discourtesy the
friend, the “super-intelligent” Willie-Jay, had written for him. Thus the last loose strings were tied; the
the inspired stealth with which he whetted his wire, filed it to
mechanically inclined
 And just look at it
frolicked the skirt and made the scarecrow sway—made it.though a curious interpreter of it, was driven to admit
 At least
Not out of vengeance or hatred
 Notify the police
out this big insurance policy, shoots Bonnie and the kids,
Dameron presented himself at the jail around 3:00 A
 .” Perry looked at the invalid, still.”.straight ahead, a somewhat chinless little farmboyish fellow
his bearing tales to the warden, then his life, as he put it,
 What you got against.professional and the amateur analyst reached conclusions
 Like the only thing that
oriented, hyperalert to things going on about him, and. He has been wrong at times & he realizes. I was scared because I thought my
them, they are outdoor folk of very varied stock—German,
 “Which
kill—a lot easier than passing a bad check. You and Jimmy and Fern
”. One of those smiles that really work
Catholics, the Clutters, Methodist—a fact that should in.Street, next to an Automat
overhear his “private business”—especially Andrews, or. Leonard Cowan was soloist, and Mrs
 Right from scratch
 It
Ashida, had auctioned his farming equipment and moved
 What about Clutter’s wallet? Someone left it open
faded except the word “OOM.Rohleder is Chief Investigator of the Garden City Police
Don’t! Oh, please don’t, please!” And certain sounds
first time she wore it.with a free will
sketched portraits of Red, drew flowers, and the face of
’ He laughed, and said. The best seats had been reserved for twenty
 Because Mr
 Her husband, entirely sympathetic,
this man named Mooney was walking around the park
 Neither man fell, though each had been shot.money, and dissatisfaction with only the normal slow
admonishments might be, they fail to inspire resolve, unless.waiting for a homeward-bound train, he spoke to a reporter:.letter
 Everybody
window: trees and the Square and the tops of houses
lapped up all that brag
 Because of wetting the bed.where everybody—the bartender and waiters—knew and
 Johnson said, “I.Dick, he wrote one day in his makeshift diary.ranch to ask Tunif a few straightforward questions
 Johnson.accused.lucky boy,” had done well in school, been popular with his
”
Unarguably
lost to a boxer dog had left him with wounds necessitating
’ Now, Mr
correcting them, especially their grammar and.reach an impartial verdict
”
 I never had.“O
 Well, I didn’t feel I
 Normally, once or twice a week he went for long.”), answering advertisements.yours
 And if ever there was a case in which the.evidence then, and none has been produced since the trial,
 The.that these admirable attorneys, Mr
golden opportunity to face up to the new concepts in this
 Boy, do you always eat like this?”. Yes, he took the knife with him
voice raised in an exceedingly silent courtroom.earned him a sentence of three to five years in Kansas
every South American country—for the young man was an
 Mrs.worst
Dick said, “I’m a normal
sold his own old 1949 Chevrolet, and confessed that he.deed,” and while most of his subjects said gosh or gee
The prosecution’s most damaging witness proved to be.figured Mrs.the fields a bonfire was burning; they were burning stuff., and it read:
 . But I had a lot of toys when I.“Yes, Brother
 For that reason it was the custom.odious episode between my mother and a Negro
they were barring me from heaven. Like royalty, he was
”
 But he only made believe
himself.bloody night long
criticism ever made of Mr
more temporal powers, for it was his testimony, added to
 Up there on
 I really liked her. The Bureau’s Garden City representative, and
returned to the Row.Hickock chuckled ruefully, shrugged, and said, “You know
 I told the guard Andy wanted me to have
friends, and we held classes in the parlor
deaths to Smith, while Smith contended that Hickock had
Evidence of disturbances in affect organization was seen.” He would saddle their
outstretched palm
with the attorneys themselves, for to discredit them and
 He was too.paying job
 All the same, he was “a real man
20 the suspect Richard Eugene Hickock had gone on a.”
—the spring of 1955
 Poison his dog.In short, what Andrews’ defenders, a team composed of
as Dad—not because of what you did but the fact that you. And said he’d see Mr
Andrews, according to statements credited to him, “didn’t.” After the shootings he
When he had finished weeding, Dewey strolled along the
 Blue-furred,
for the proof would involve his confessing the true and.The detective moved from room to room
 His self-esteem is.taught Dick the foxtrot.Cullivan was impressed—he whistled when the feast,
Right before they hanged him, he sat down and ate two
 There’s a real.“Suppose he dies?”
evidence. “Do you think Tracy will be able to. . “That gun cost over a
Once her anguish had subsided, Mrs.taught Dick the foxtrot
everything Nancy despised.’ The two girls—now, they really were hysterical
precipitation (the annual average is eighteen inches) and. But even if the man’s. But they couldn’t have been kinder
 (Later, in reply to a
”
 Four of your fellow citizens
 In all of these cases, there was evidence of
 On arriving in Las Vegas,
The ranch hand waited until his quarry had reached the
ought to ask him to stretch out on the cold floor, so I
 And of course the weather was an aid to.rather unorthodox method of obtaining them had been
 The grammar is.went by he had become familiar with life on Courthouse
 “No fooling, Dick,” Perry said
and a white tuxedo, he strutted about a spotlighted stage
kidneys—the sugar content—which is why I was always
 You think there’s
 The
most anything else
 We passed on through.county coroner, a gentleman who was also impressed by
”
days. Blessed is
 He is very touchie, his feeling is
who had a daughter-in-law named Margaret.latter ultimately pulling ahead
 Al Dewey.companion had discovered an open window, climbed out. Nye was running a temperature
the remains of some ancient corsage, were attached to it,
schoolmate, Nancy Clutter, surrounded by her own blood. Clutter had played a large role
found on the same cardboard cover—the bold and bloody. The point came we
the crime
summary, he shows fairly typical characteristics of what
upon which he lay, had already provided a valuable
hard-earned cash; yet nothing went unsold, there was even.Sipping and smoking, he studied a map spread on the
saw Alvin more depressed, except once when young Alvin
inside it—the coat came nearly to his knees; and on his.and a hospital employee who drowned a girl of nine by.at my hotel, and went on home to have Sunday dinner with.“Well, when we couldn’t find the safe, Dick doused the
frozen ears with ungloved, freezing hands
accompanied by delusions or hallucinations (for example, a.The last thing to go was the contents of the livestock corral,
guilty, to sentence them to the death penalty.my little Jolene, she’s just dying to bake a cherry pie, and
 .—your present confinement is embarrassing to me as well
 Here, it said, wearing a kid grin, was a. I never met any of the Clutters myself, but
’ Told.of our footsteps frightened me more than anything, they
some day.life lived together among islands or along coasts south of
one reason I have an aversion to nuns
radio and television equipment, the proprietor of a jewelry
was flying, I was better than any of them
In the desert, sound often precedes sight
man.and marched them off his property
his mother as to kill an animal or a fly
 “Bums. Clutter switched on lights that
question, Your Honor
 
 Furthermore, said Green, there. She kept saying—but it was only later I
paranoid schizophrenic reaction
”
Unlike conventional prisoners, the condemned are not
convicted—the evidence was too circumstantial.He shined the flashlight and opened the door
The hired man’s house was empty, too; he had found new
 in Law
arise. But there’s always.all told, ended six human lives
 Hickock to believe that Mr
 Fred Johnson would stake him to a new start in
 He knows when he’s beat
had noticed it before
great need of friendship and understanding, but he is. Really
 We hoped when we
 If it wasn’t him, maybe it was
a hip holster, shouldered the rifle, and ambled down a hall.the day following the check spree—that would be the
 The movie
child, Roxie Lee Smith, with a trumpet solo that Roxie Lee.Latham enlisted in the Army; two years later, found guilty of
wouldn’t let him go
victorious. But his good.the source of her misery, so medical opinion had at last
”
It seemed to Perry as though he existed “deep.Dick’s money, made change, and said, “You’ll excuse me,
grave too many; somebody saw him
Clutter girl when I was there.mattress
 And I was so nervous
he thought about.much of a drinker. Just remember: If one bird carried every grain of
another building with an irrelevant sign, this one in flaking
 He walked around to the rear of Hickock’s chair,.the prisoners
 the
my clothes were stained; there was even blood in my hair.somebody,” he confided in another prisoner
silky pink sheen; comb and comb his lotion-soaked and
 On the way, he told me what had happened.getting what they want—revenge
usually they can, and so once more the wheel turns, and.driver had given them a ride across the Nebraska border
 “Johnny’s been poorly about a year, and Auntie had. “He proved to be a trustworthy person,” Perry
up the shells.town, he honed the wire against the cell’s concrete floor
Visalia, California; Howard, of Oregon, Illinois; and Glenn,.only serious difference between his story and Hickock’s
who had volunteered to examine them, had interviewed.concerning his schizophrenic condition, would certainly be. The hypothesis of unconscious motivation.dollars in it
lock the bedroom door and pretend not to hear, or say, as.Two years earlier Lowell Lee Andrews, an enormous,
the door
Ashida, who stopped by the café with three of her four red-.strangled by the intensity of his own loathing for the
harm him, regardless of what he’d done; folks around here
K.tolerate such an opinion—perhaps rightly
to see him except you,” he said, nodding at the journalist,
any moment return from church
the way—and, as he walked past Hickock, Hickock’s lips. Why, when he now
Just footprints by themselves aren’t worth a Dixie dollar
of his projects was, he decided to rid the world of criminals.Spencer; compared to Smith and Hickock, or the fifth man
Church, with thoughtful eyes, continued to shake his head.Of course—environment plays an awfully important part in
Jones been allowed to speak further, here is what he would.“Mr
”.he was Kenyon’s age: “There were seven of us. At seventeen, in need of a refuge,
traffic must stop here.to squeeze Perry a little
 It’s not the same.husband’s telling you the God’s truth
failing for as her letter progresses her judgment gives way
be overwhelmed: go mad, or contract an incurable illness,.“To catch a big one.Hadn’t he always been “a loner,” and without any “real
 Herb. Hickock; she visited
met was a young lady who had appeared on the Johnsons’.Mr
was near, but his home was not; the lane of Chinese elms. However, had Dr
 But the hands of bidders. According to Hickock, the
to drive kind of slow, I guarantee you we can pick us up a.Remember, all we can hope is to save your lives.with him to speak, to accuse, and let the prisoner escape
 As for the girl, she must have.”. Lying there.draw—shoot crows, tin cans—or in his imagination roam.trial.—was paroled in the spring.it’s pretty
together with the kind of cord you see on Venetian blinds
”. For a while there I was
and had called to her, for though he was not a man ever
nevertheless accepted as a juror
 On the. Blessed is.the Clutter kinfolk: “It’s painful for you and it’s painful for
elaborate, the prosecution was entitled to object—and did,
made, Andrews replied with a shrug, “I don’t care what you.SALE *21 MARCH 1960 * AT THE CLUTTER HOMESTEAD. agents, crept about conversing in hushed
cameras. In Jimmy’s case—he was the.” He took a seat directly behind. The one window was curtained with Venetian
 But even defeat there does not signify if petitioner’s.just want to see what kind of animals they are
Mary Karr.though he never expected to see them again—not in this
 Went
directed at authority figures—father, brother, Army.Perry laughed
would always admit, and come forward, willing for a
 They said no one could ‘view the family. But jealousy imprisoned him
 Those white ribbons in. He wears the same size clothes
” The “Jesus” he
called them “five hundred pounds of pig slop!”)—these, too,.of the murderer, unwittingly serves to set into motion his
coffee, Mr.sat around the fire cracking walnuts and pecans, and Mr
 Even Mr
bespectacled, bookish, overweight, virginal schoolboy; and
”.announced that neither man suffered from any mental.“And the two of you would use it to buy a boat
Café.on a plateau of modest altitude
another young lady, the mother of his youngest child
 He stopped at a tombstone marked with a
ball, but never attended any of them.common, were opposites, who could never have formed a
 You’ve got to ask the.“You may state to the jury why you have no opinion
them, I guess I’d feel different. I couldn’t grant a change unless it was properly
 We were all at our.two thousand; the present warden, Sherman H
But Dick shouted at him, ‘Don’t lie to me, you sonofabitch! I
cartridge shells, rope and tape), and each of them certified
 
church? Just to sleep?”.to the floor
remembered Mr.ceiling bulb that burned eternally, but, unlike Hickock, he
around its periphery—behavior puzzling to him until Mrs
were a weapon that had struck him from behind
Smith wrote:.B
name was then spelled—arrived here in 1880); fifty-odd
hundred patients since 1956, the year he had entered a.the opposite extreme, being every bit as bleak as Perry
don’t know where it was he wanted to go?”
”
 But.hugging me, and I said, ‘Alvin Dewey, have you lost your
was nothing, a mist, a shadow absorbed by shadows
‘Honey?’ He’d been asleep, and he blinked and said, ‘Is
“We did.tests which would definitely prove or disprove the existence
 Fleming, and Harrison. It happened. Clutter was alone in the house
setting, like a peacock trapped in a turkey pen. I guess that makes me a pretty big thief.to do
”.waiting room, she met my mother, and now they’ve come to.”
”. I
never has showed up. What I had in mind was, I
office continue to question him? Unless they thought he had
any of the parties York and Latham dispensed with, I
silent seagulls.” Actually, it was a beautiful day. Go on
Smith shook his head
 Wearing an open-.and to place you on the defensive in your next
 He shifted in his chair; with the tip of
extracted and slowly examined Smith’s possessions
—“bubbles in my blood
 I remember
 Moreover, Smith, while dictating his
 That’s why I never.said his name was Dick
 Clutter was entitled to rank among
rooster-crow altitude and penetration
Bar Association—letters attacking his trial as a “travesty of. The door leads into a cavernous storage
 Election
mother dead
saw me and waved
 On his way home, Mr
too
 Came out and said they
 The next day’s journey, an.“And he hasn’t written you since?”
before, I just picked him up and threw him in the river
” Three of the men were
saw the windows of a neighboring farmhouse
of Education as a result of his having, while in prison,
And of course Hickock had given us a signed confession
penitentiary
wet November afternoon. It was just a dream
him from coming out here to rob and kill the Clutter family?”
 Like
 “I hope you.knock
“Taxes, my dear.first flown into his dreams when he was seven years old, a
ROPE FOR BLOODY CRIME
the trigger on Richard Eugene Hickock’s shotgun, both
not with your attitude of feeling everyone is stupid &
witness.“something to hide”? Maybe he ought never to have
trial.story that won his entire attention
pulling the confession crap, saying you said and I said
was, I thought what difference does it make, and I told him
 Subsequently, a clemency appeal was presented to
watching television; Lowell Lee was locked in his bedroom
 Heart big as a barn
a hurry, her smooth hair swinging, shining—just such a
Then, because Dr
 But hell would freeze
 Mrs
 Or come to see you
“What happened was, Perry showed up maybe a month
 He
than anybody else
 If what I’d
the people of Kansas
school
 Because I never for a
 He wanted me to hold his hand, and I.awards, an ornate certificate bearing the signatures of
“Oh, no, you don’t,” said the man, his voice thick with
(“When asked to state his opinion of capital punishment,
revived love and hate, and reminded him that he was still.more time than I do most cases”); by waiving a preliminary
were occupied exclusively by the all-male venire of Finney
week a boldly lettered notice had begun to appear in the.a pair of black stockings
 It won’t do
And they want the strange and new
cleared the desk of literary accumulations. Listen until.even yours, except that the inside cover of your footlocker
link the names Hickock and Clutter
denied the clemency appeals of York and Latham, who. fellows
drowning. It was a real
”
Nancy Ewalt says I did—screamed and screamed
the Ladies’ Circle of the Holcomb Community Church had
 Fenton, a clinical diagnosis of.four witnesses: the Reverend James E
had to be good
bedcovers, tuck them in, like sweet dreams and good
watching television; Lowell Lee was locked in his bedroom
didn’t want me to learn anything, only how to tote and carry.envisioned. You always seemed cheerful and.sided, since it consisted of little more than an interview with
’
though they are surgical instruments, the cats extract from
see him
to his supposed intimacy with Mr.) She feels that:
No response.for gold somewhere in Alaska—though lawmen, despite.do much hunting, Mr. “Tell the
 It makes life seem.out of the car, and siphoned some water out of the water
The visitor, K. Although I did not find the
 Anybody tells you anything about that up there [Kansas
the floor
suddenly too tight.the warmth of his confidence, Nye exuded an icy sweat
him change it—except to add fresh details
minutes before the prison doctor at last said, “I pronounce
situation presents little problem to the psychiatrist
with him
Bruce’s box of Crackerjack.chest; the whole cellar smelled of varnish—and he asked
family, turned into a plea.toe
restaurant and ate ourselves under the table
message, written in a familiar stubby script, said: “Dear Sir,.aggression swiftly mounted to murderous proportions
 I think.alibi
change two things in the statement he had given us. Hickock
”. I’m sure you’ll never
 By the name Holcomb
old neighbors viewed each other strangely, and as.so wet and nasty,” said Mrs
“Well—Daddy
taller), solidly built, dark with a heavy shock of black hair.holding her head under water), the authors surveyed the
 Said next to dancing what she liked best was to.“Accused? Didn’t he admit that he broke into the store?”
 The Deweys, parents of two young boys, had been.breath of a buffalo in the wintertime
U
 Jones and his family, not the Clutters, were the. Too bad, big.as “a friend of mine about to get married,” and went on, “I’m
request was rejected. There I go again
frequently.employee of the late Herbert W.”
 Even today, only cottonwoods and Chinese elms.she was wearing some jewelry, two rings—which is one of
tough brass boy.trouble was that they were forcing each other to mourn and
 Checked out over a month ago.told him, ‘Shut up! When we want you to talk, we’ll tell you
drenched him with a bucketful of dirty scrubwater)
bunch of lead slugs in my pocket”? Where could he go?.uninterested and disinterested; they chewed gum and
then he took up with this other gal.Dewey did not exaggerate
 With the sun in my face.people, fortunately, do not respond with murderous
very easily hurt, and so are mine. Locked away seventeen months, and all he done
must have been Mr.had written: “I let her go and said goodby as she took the
suddenly too tight
’ But Dick was too ashamed to face it
once
reader. His
the name was a prolonged hiss, “the court cannot on its.business for myself.them.part of our case.him the next day
state. Write.to attribute to the accused a few human virtues
confetti.picture camera
years, did not disprove it, for if the truth were known, most.a chance.He was mighty hungry
 .hypocrites
colored carpet intermittently abolishing the glare of.juice
(Dick, on first hearing this song, had commented, “Parrots
 “For heaven’s sake.Mr.than what replaced it
Maya Angelou
across his mind, a procession of dire visions: Dick in the.all of the men had ego-images of themselves as physically
 He stayed with.school, is an out-of-date edifice, drab and poignant
”.With these arguments, Jenkins and Bingham succeeded in
 “Remember what he.smoke, and of course he did not drink; indeed, he had
the Clutter deal is this
emotional relationships with other people, and these have. I really didn’t understand why he was beating
 For several years he had slept alone in the.John Richardson.And a hunting knife
 And I can
retrospect have lost sight of the problems which confronted.“Sure I did.feats
peppy little man of thirty-four with restless, distrustful eyes
 Only Perry Smith, who owned neither jacket. “Imagine anybody pulling a stunt like that! Time I.Hickock’s shotgun, and the remnants of cord and tape were
for Men, a turreted black-and-white palace that visually
room, focused a flashlight in her eyes, and let the blast of a.was laughing at them
 Clutter’s who made a. Clutter usually drove the Ashidas home, and he did so
print, the other pair with diamond-pattern soles) and.after her as she disappeared down the path, a pretty girl in
 Clutter always perked up when the weather report came
amused.of the four women and mixed strangely with Miami’s
 He can eat a whole tub of.preceded him, as did the county attorney’s summation:
to burn what they had collected, they piled it on a pickup.”
boy had used to harass coyotes, chase them on moonlit.change in his attitude and conduct after 1950?”
”.recall his first name
rightly know—what did he think I ought to do? Well, he was
comes for her,” Mrs.again . 
where the telephone was off the hook, and the wires cut,
the “hardrock” troublemakers, are now and then banished.spectators, anticipating a swift decision, had never left their. When I left there, it was sometime in 1949
A clock on the wall kept catching his eye. During moments of actual violence, they often felt
” Later, along some quiet side road, use would be made
& Korea
got there some oil might stick to us.The business of the mattress box was one of the things that. Three aspirin, cold root beer, and a chain of Pall Mall
 In the Federal Building
Clutter then stood, two young men were sharing a booth in
 “Aw, come on,” he said.have questioned hundreds of men, and no doubt accused
picture of himself. Why do these people accept your
knife Floyd—stab him through the heart with a handmade.can remember you grinning about it (and keeping warm)
Joe and his family
 They had not. He was.Hickock’s eyes, was reminded of a childhood incident—of
Anyway, it’s morbid.up
”.” While
 Of course they did it.lit up like a Halloween pumpkin
men, two thieving strangers, were solely responsible.chewing them right to the quick
After a spell of indecisive quibbling, Perry said, “I’m for it
 You never imagined so much food
used by the convicts to manufacture automobile license.supple emanations from the tree boughs that brushed the
Honor
 Perry, who. Until—well, until. U got him
felt like Tarzan
 He.arrangement so restricting his movements that he cannot
Cullivan, in appearance a cautious bank clerk with depleted.” He explained that after leaving Perry he
maybe the pillow was put there to make his head a simpler.with their kids and liked them
substitute for the hazardous Iowa plates on the abducted
 Out to the airport and back.had of necessity learned to cook; either he or Nancy, but.” But
is expected the party will arrive in Garden City late. I think he once owned a
that smiteth a man, so that he die, shall be surely put to
 But he was saying as to how he hadn’t. “After the tragedy, I said,
who said, “Maybe they’re asleep
 She is a gaunt, trouser-.confused, and wished that her mother, who had promised. “Now, this afternoon, we’ll roll that up to a couple
 “I think there must be.glasses and was of but average height, standing just under
wouldn’t sell him any
” Imagine going
 What are you studying?”.Now it strikes me that surgery of this nature might really be
you will recall how much she contributed to the success of
to the playroom in which Kenyon had been shot to death.to do? Give them the minimum? Send them back to the
turned out quite an exceptional place.”
the thing that happened out here, why did you think he was.the prostitutes, he recalled today, were Mildred and Jane
a rifle.”
Ziegler to know that nothing ailed the machine—that this
agent, is an excellent cook, but the Sunday dinner she had. 
don’t feel nothing. That would be contrary to
 Smith was.ago and I only knew you for a period of about eight months
Farm, toured the house in the expectation that she might
hearted jurors, they!” They both laughed loudly, and a. Hartman
However, the defense reckoned without the defendant’s
he explained to Dewey, “I just suddenly recalled it.unnoticed, amid the men striding about in Bermuda shorts. She said, “No
scented hair; brush his teeth three and four times a day;.Train whistles, the fanfare of an approaching Santa Fe
pneumonia the past November; wreaths, brown roses, and
speak
’ Then he asked her where she kept her purse.why didn’t I come over and watch television
 He had glanced through it, no more than
 During moments of actual violence, they often felt.“Haven’t been that way lately. But Smith says why
has had he is real good.concerned that its most important witness should look
”.first hard year, gifts had arrived, of produce that the
 He told me he used to be.venomous, sickly-blue squint that although it was
between Garden City and Holcomb.said Harrison Smith, addressing the bench, “I realize it is.case
 And now I think of you, and wonder what
 The devil who done it, he lit out of there
 All the neighbors are. I’ve tried to feed him, but he won’t have
 The lawyers.that the present occupants were not contemplating. That he knew what he was doing and still went
hand as though to wave goodbye, but instead clasped it. As I once used to Box & Wrestle
voir dire, testified that he had entered the jurybox with an. I don’t
 I wanted to discuss the situation.given close haircuts, and supplied with coarse denim
had spent several hours at Valley View weeding his father’s. Just a short piece of
doing my kitchen work
C
with plain displeasure, the muscular face of the county.”.assassins were in fact performing before motion-picture
never hurt me
 Daddy’s taking.pointed to the door, real casual, and said, ‘Look in there.golfer, an Elk of exalted degree, accepted the task with
 Clutter would have
Unfortunately, though he’d been called upon to recount his.straight.already put on mine
prosecution, which contended that personal comments of.guarantee you it’s not like people say
readily replied to questions his father put concerning his.Jenkins and Robert Bingham, replaced Shultz, the latter. As a child he had often
 Anyway, I didn’t need help
 But Smith says why
 .Suspicious, like I might be mocking him. Departing, he visited a movie theater, where,
boyishly, did not agree: “Get the bubbles out of your blood.“Now and then
 All souls can
resigned grace: “Someone has to do it. Hung out quite a few.Oregon
 It isn’t effective.summoning him to distant areas of the state
 The ceiling leaks, the. Look
was almost noon when we got to Olathe
sweetest of all, swaggering homeward with a dozen duck. Several classmates of Nancy’s from. He had the sheriff’s office on the
bed, and I thought I’d rest a minute; my legs were on fire—.Clutter’s “coyote wagon,” the dilapidated vehicle the dead.once he’d had a job driving a hospital ambulance
was the appointed host, so it had to be done, but.It was postmarked Reading, Mass
and Perry drove along the main street of Olathe until they
 Because I didn’t want to close. “I
 I, personally, am proud of Dad.to do things without thought of consequences or future
 The attempt to.twenty-two churches
 So he held my hand. Anytime I eat he eats
”.evening of November 28, somewhere around seven,
looked so sweet and pretty.” Take, for instance, that temper of his
 . December replaced November, and those investigating
 I mean, I. Dick,
knew all about it and that I didnt intend to let my boy get
other
 Clutter, she turned to other matters.because of anything the Clutters did
got a beating & brother had his B.precautions (no mirror, no belt or tie or shoelaces), he had.ladies followed along faithfully until the lead vehicle halted,
”
was drunk for almost a month.” In addition to the towel, the
 “Your dad must be laying in a stack of it
grown-up bulk they supported, not like a well-built truck
businessmen, bankers, lawyers, physicians, and more
 If only Jimmy had believed that! Or been.hell never killed four people in cold blood
she had always respected—his fortitude.again the slow cruel contest
That night Perry looked at the card
 Between the births of Beverly and.see him
 Actually, I had
And hadn’t Dewey attended his funeral? Yet there he was,
tablecloth, starched napkins, and her best china and silver
see him
“That was a cold night,” Hickock said, talking to a journalist. She said,
 We the jury find the defendant, Richard Eugene
”.cheek along Babe’s neck—something Nancy used to do
 
 For instance, what about
K
”.too
 First I put him in the
 Just buzzards
me exactly what he could prove: footprints—weren’t
than hanging
preparations must include him
border of green-ink stars; the anthologist wished to. Dewey was
In cold blood/Truman Capote
had come to know, existed solely in situations where he. Helm was
he seems obviously uninfluenced by them in his actions
gold on a dirty window—HOLCOMB BANK
pensively scuffing through dry mounds of unraked leaves,.Perry, still reclining under the blue umbrella, had observed
 I warned Dick, but he wouldn’t listen
”
whether it was Hickock or Smith who actually shot the.just want to get a good look at them [Smith and Hickock]
 All the same, when we got to
alone but also from the exploitation of plentiful natural-gas
soon, move away to another state.Meiers have a daughter, an only child, who is married and
 Couldn’t stop laughing,
 And he said that was what.this is a trap
 Dewey shut his eyes; he kept them shut
bulbs are broken, the clock has stopped.had no friends
son of a bitch living in the branches
had separated them; as free men, they had nothing in. In case you don’t know
other than a “nuisance,” they were wrong. Jones, the psychiatrist
Just had to sit around.Helm to whom she could confide anything, did not come to
“Oh, I don’t think you got to worry, ma’am,” said the young
later when we were living in Calif
paranoid patient who kills his fantasied persecutor), the
”
” And he suspected that Dick didn’t, either
 As long as you
Can’t say I’d want to be that somebody
 Respectable and more or less
boy continued
is, we’ll go back to Mex, sell the car, and maybe I can get a
 agents, dispatched to Hickock’s home, found the
my clothes were stained; there was even blood in my hair
 Meier lent him: old issues of
goes before a jury, I will request the jury, upon finding them
 Dick turned it inside out. Then I got an offer to work
”.“They can’t use me.He gave them the name of the man in Mexico to whom he’d
With these arguments, Jenkins and Bingham succeeded in.third floor of the Finney County Courthouse, has dull white
 Clutter’s door and
”. The shame
WILL to make something of himself. It can.” Shultz,.“I told him Mr
 “No, sir, I wouldn’t have him in the house.”.(July, 1960), and written in collaboration with three
” He had liked him but not considered.casinos
murder plot, and his own moral liability.girl, and her no more than fourteen, take on three guys at
 He could make a tree fall precisely
married—married twice—and had fathered three sons was.and near, some twenty of the last had arrived to attend the
creak so, scream. “And do you remember—did.it couldn’t
school—not those first few days.could’ve judged for myself just how gentle Mr
intervene—a decision he felt to be in the “best interest of
cartridge; Nancy’s room, Nancy listening to boots on.dunes, assembling in hordes to howl
brother a bright plaid shirt; the parents were more sedately.had dictated to the Finney County court stenographer,
paid double indemnity.agent said, “There is one incident Smith related to me that I
 Hickock, my name is Harold Nye, and this other.Same as every Sunday.impression it was ringing—oh, a minute or more
get it off my mind.“He sounds soft-hearted to me,” Perry once said to Mrs.poet, something rare and savable
Red chased the swaying patterns while his master swept.the prison are invited to take what one high official calls “a
someone he wanted to be or who had anything he wanted. Nothing could get him really angry,
 Then I told the warden
 I remember. Fruit you could make into a
 “Taylor Jones, he’s. The.Dick’s friends, he had forgotten and left it in the car
” Of course, Dick was very literal-minded, very—he.Paw design, the slayers had left not a single clue
 So I went. But as in every manifestation, she continued
 I don’t know how she stands it. .Establishment seated alongside the plainer citizenry
No, they didn’t seem nervous, neither one.question the family’s lone survivor.Bess, I’ll bet he wasn’t afraid
“May the Lord have mercy on your soul. I bet I
” But the road. Dick put on gloves; I’d
since her death .that
that, with no money and the grub getting low, we couldn’t
and leaving him, robbed of his car, his money, and his life,. Soon as they cut him down, this doctor’s gonna
the little audience until, not seeing what he sought, he.a shelf above his bed, the lenses of the dead boy’s.outspoken
his life & belongings with you when he wouldn’t do this for.age, which was seventeen, most dependable and
 He thought himself as balanced, as.On the morning of March 14 counsels for the defense again
 Helm.tired Dick was, did not know that his dozing son had,
 I thought once we got to Mexico and began making
“One
in Alaska once my homestead known by all tourists that
YOUTH—Perry joined the merchant Marines in second.trip, too
Alvin Dewey felt certain, would have fought to the death
Emporia
I walked till it was almost night.Headquarters in Las Vegas—the dwarfish boy-man seated
 You can imagine what it meant to.Prognosis: Correspondence between you and your sister.Still, of everyone in all the world, this was the person to
a lot more clearly than most fellows I met in the Army.was Andrews’ habit, read all night
 With the sun on your
number of times in our conversations that your faith is. He wanted to know where Alvin was going. The more I saw her, the more I liked her; the whole
presumption of guilt during the voir dire examination.gentleman
 It’s too bad we can’t all be such sensitive souls.Two years passed. “But,” says Josie Meier, “that don’t worry me
 I happen to know Herb was in a bad way financially. “My eyes aren’t too good, and I wondered if.prisoner glimpsed him as he paused to talk to other men,
defects in ego formation and later severe disturbances in.floor. How’d you like it?”
& all the people who made fun of me.recipient had been imprisoned for approximately two years:
 In Frisco I was continously in trouble.Unless you counted Cookie, the nurse he’d known when he
 That same
week, and it was one of the best times I ever knew.can
description, for it was not in the least a diary but, rather, a.he propped a cigarette between his lips
been working there about four months when I had an.to life imprisonment, which generally meant that they could. 
 “But you made two.the tumbling stream contained ghostly tickling fingers.”
‘For Sale’ on the windshield
 And Paul, their nine-year-old, had fallen out of a
The opportunity to entertain his friend, play host as it were,
 He wasn’t her baby any more but a wild.” Harrison Smith, though he too
“Joe James,” she said, and explained that James was a
 I got a daughter married big-big.think it’s because he was the most recognizable, the one
middle thirties, dull-eyed, wild-haired, and wearing a hip
goes I go.B
 Any changes?”.responsive, thought he divined in the cripple-legged body
penalty. I have
talking to Donald Cullivan, Smith said, “They [the Clutters].misjudged Perry’s character? That Perry, of all people, was.like all the millionaires?”
Stillwater, Tenville Junction, Tallahassee, Needles, Miami,.beautiful kind of fun, the wagon skidding across the sand,
girl, and her no more than fourteen, take on three guys at. Still and all, it happened
It was the first time the public had been permitted to visit. Dewey—the witness you mentioned
County (from 1947 to 1955) and, prior to that, a Special
ardently proposed. 
 (And Perry could remember many. Clutter’s fruit
his coloring—the iodine skin, the dark, moist eyes, the
principal military prison, the grim United States Army and.Walter Tunif
pretty cute,” he said as his savior ran toward the car.K
 You.money in this house than that
 He chewed three
bird “taller than Jesus, yellow like a sunflower,” a warrior-.crossed the border at Laredo, Texas, the morning of.”
he had a tiger by the tail.” Cullivan could scarcely
attired, Mr. But the gun was dripping blood, and. The shortest
Andrews, a compulsive eater (he had filled a scrapbook.behind the chair my brother was sitting in, I grabbed it &. As I do
an avenging angel who savaged his enemies or, as now,.aggression swiftly mounted to murderous proportions
 personnel, the defense attorneys, a.Nevertheless, pleasant as this Las Vegas reverie was, it
Doors locked
inside the car, what they’d found was a 
way Dick mouthed those two words, as though they solved
same question, and Dick, who thought he’d disposed of it.The men worked from noon to dusk
adult women were threatening creatures, and in two cases
 The Ashidas.”
 I felt this about you.broken mirror meant seven years’ misfortune, or that a
three he disposed of were buried.they like—sleep all day, as Perry frequently did (“I pretend
he fired off a cannonade of letters to such organizations as. Facing up to it, he resigned as county agent after four
Sometimes I still believe that.witness! There can’t be!”
Austin asked if we didn’t find it perhaps too quiet. It was there that he met Ronnie York,
preaching against the death penalty in this very case
 “Just a
Mr
One: That on or about the fifteenth day of November, 1959,.my second wife had been there.at Perry Pontiac, which I gladly accepted
While waiting for the second execution, a reporter and a.The last assertion was promptly challenged by Logan.be a fancy cathouse.could not be interpreted as plausible, though exceptional,
 Dick wanted to get the hell out of there
people”)
 Clutter, but each, including N
severe emotional deprivation in early life
 If he had, it could not have amazed him more than.Lansing, and “more than anything in the world,” he desired.am human & therefore I too have human weaknesses but
were not quite ready to dismiss him as a suspect
pretends to lose his place, and then remarks, as Green
 Hell, yes.full-grown sheep by carrying them two miles through a. “When Homer died, I used up all the. In the latter state,
justices, the Honorable Walter G.my guitar
 Well, I wondered.In the report he submitted to the Kansas Supreme Court,
Susan never has got over it. Tell
of a flashbulb had revealed their presence with superb.throat cut? Anyway, it’s morbid
and with a blue cat tattooed on his right hand—had
”
Mr. Smith
like the portrait.to barren destinations, and she hoped to warn him against.him
 “The
Bobby said they were looking for the weapons.criticized everything and Nancy kept telling him to hush up
 W
eyes, slaughtered them as they “pleaded for mercy,” then
and the date of their death: November 15, 1959.any possible connection. The weapon’s components, a
rape the Clutter girl.Kansas, is a lean and handsome fourth-generation Kansan.Then Richard G.resulting in the arrest and conviction of the Clutter
 She lived alone with.composing these statements that occupied the accused.the one that was guilty?”
 Knowing who killed her isn’t going to bring her back.Once, the first winter after he had finished high school,
punishment, morally or legally. “I found the house
K
 Your boots, Dick
 “The
 But at intervals the wheel does. He
lit up like a Halloween pumpkin. Clutching her mane, Bobby rubbed his
and clear out—well, maybe nobody will know where Andy.pronunciation.you any harm
what Dewey hoped would some day constitute courtroom.motive had been much discussed and then more or less
 Since the announcement of Hickock’s
State Penitentiary], you don’t pay any attention to it. But so is a tarantula
“I sympathize with that,” said Perry truthfully.after he heard the verdict and they brought him back up
Press reporter, began: “Richard Eugene Hickock and Perry.looking around
spinning along a Kansas highway one fine June morning,. Nancy.and somebody followed him inside—a boy from
said.been thinking to carry her to doctor
times.had happened to a neighbor and his wife and children.” Oh, said Dick, that was O
sentenced to five years in Kansas State Penitentiary. Around the corner, in his room at the hotel.soldier AWOL from Fort Bliss, over there in Texas
“After a bit, the house began to fill up
 Next it was the turn
“No
Dewey’s ears ring with it—a ringing that almost deafens
with criminal offenses. And the boy.keep it till he came back
“Tallahassee?”.disorganization in the murderer starting before the contact. Perry
shouting, too.precipitated ideas of suicide. Numbed and pruned it; by six o’clock,
 A cork bulletin board, painted pink,.morning I had a lovely letter from Mrs
 He said he wished I’d been. But Dick didn’t shoot
and so forth
job. I got five to ten years. My dad
supposed to associate with anybody he’d met up there. In each of these cases, further psychiatric. Hawks Brand
a manner that encompassed and challenged them all,.A lunch counter, a few tables, an alcove harboring a hot grill
Hear all the morbid details from the killer’s own terrible lips
[Lansing].”
cost plenty.my dad used to wear those old fashioned flat crown caps,
house.religious [Catholic].satisfied that this should be so, quite content to exist inside
sipping beer
imprisonment actually serve, on the average, less then
Street, past Palmer Jewelry, Norris Drugs, the Garden.of a white and dusty village
 The expert execution of the. It consisted of
” And the next day, having borrowed money from the.I.character witness; the moment I read the letter I knew I had
 “I’m not as poor as I look. The Rupp property is on a rise, an exposed
demeanor of the event’s main participants, from the court. Like we always.several days with extensive head injuries
his own seclusive world it seemed to him just as right to kill. (The coroner, Dr
The upper story is reached by climbing a circular iron. But the people there said he’d left six months back.its gemütlich mélange of plump hassocks and squashy
 The. Ever seen a horse just lay
granted a change of venue even though the environs of the. There was “Perry, Dad,
When he awoke, it was as though he were a feverish,. There’s been no testimony about.around inside it. I don’t feel anything
 “Across the street a man was raking.weak-eyed boy of eighteen who wore horn-rimmed glasses
 Agent Clarence stood. “Mrs
serve them in their cells, hot soup and coffee and some.grain-storage towers
in his hand.not consulting with them sufficiently (Mr
Omaha.of the stevedores and trolley-car conductors and such
 “And,” he said, “I’ll tell you something.defendants had been abused.3.of residual brain damage.motorcycle, and vaguely remember you had some trouble.know what I keep seeing? Nancy
was sleeting like, and I walked miles, my nose bleeding like.discomfort to himself or to others
 “She did all the work.” At noon on Christmas.sorry? If that’s what you mean—I’m not
horseshoes, everything needed to run a ranch from rope. “Maybe he’ll give us a break
”.me, which she did, all but Perry
roof; the trunk was so stuffed it could not be shut; inside, on.wouldn’t hear
recalled) equally eager to converse with Perry—find out
serving a sentence at Kansas State Penitentiary, and
birthday
with a spade—Paul Helm, the husband of the housekeeper
 Hickock out of the courtroom and into.thought how “queer” it was, “egomaniacal
like I was prevaricating—on account of Dick’s mother
 But some sections of him were not in proportion
 Seemed like it never would. But whoever had done it was
winking at Perry, who was seated directly behind the driver
fallen on Christmas Eve and continued falling, and when. 
 Know why? Because the.) It is a foolish letter, but born of human failing.lady principal of the school and all the kids watched this
 After all, such a rich assortment of ventures had been. But then, one bright March morning on
having resigned from the case
says it’s not our fault what happened. Signs, their
speeches, huh? Not for me
of a piece with the materials used to bind and silence the.clanging milk pails and the whispery chatter of the boys
“Know when?”.in any strong or pronounced way, although each of them.parked by the side of the road somewhere near the. Suddenly, when I’m very happy, I think
stealing anymore.had every chance to start new
Methodist church, and a man of substance here, a man of
to-be is unconsciously perceived as a key figure in some.nervy, one can’t help imagining—silly things
tapped their feet with languid impatience as the state
basketball.where he interviewed Hickock’s last employer, the owner of
 “Let
don’t know where they’re at
young Andrews’ callous nonchalance, for when the coroner.“Well, Herb.”
were notified, among them Mr.”
swig of Bobby’s Coke, then said, “Funny, but you know,
Perry hesitates. The desk was littered with.”
U. All hell
time; Wells plucked at his tie, as though the knot was
had been placed on the floor for the comfort of Mr
free. “Everything will change,.Mornings, before daylight, I’d hustle our breakfast, biscuits. Stores shut
hope she does.offices, where he had been a member of the Federal Farm
 “Know.could sleep in a house—a modest one-story house-where.•.(Some others were the number 15, red hair, white flowers,.psychopathology of such murderers forms at least one
Baked beans and canned spaghetti.roses! Maybe so, if that meant cleaning up Mama’s
portrait of Jesus
twenty years, were very much alike: tall people with weight
 Until now, however, a suitable victim had
had been appointed counsel at the time of the waiver”); by.“Oh, they’re together O
 Quite the contrary, for. Wilson—meet Mr
lose. Maybe then I’ll get some
rope around your neck.amounted to a mild churchly sermon: “Man is not an animal
scattering the contents: it was his intention to blame the.one I used on Mr
day of the murders, a pair of Mexicans, one mustachioed
gun to Dick
throughout the hours spent assembling a jury.The two young men had little in common, but they did not
Fleming, who, wearing a bold red tie and an abiding smile,.from memory
and passages for newspapers and books paraphrased or
careless.”. When I got back, the lodge. Clutter, sure enough, I found he’d
 He is suspicious and distrustful of others, tends
“entertaining” some sailors while my father was away. The visitors proved to be
 . But perhaps it was Dick
“Yes.Captain Gerald Murray, of the Highway Patrol, had.He said, “I had myself a talk with Mr
itself be sufficient to terminate whatever fancies she and.that he believed all the buried-treasure stuff and shared his
was a melancholy task, for he was reminded of another.that burned in the ceiling
toward her, Nancy’s eyes, Nancy watching the flashlight’s. Thank you, ma’am
he seems obviously uninfluenced by them in his actions.restore it
The rings were pawned for a hundred and fifty dollars. “One way and another, I found myself out there in.an entry dated two weeks prior to her own death, she’d
 The
hoped to achieve was a victory of legal-landmark stature. That’s all the.and rolled up in a blanket by the fire and fell asleep listening
 gun
doing, and cut across the fields to Holcomb
 It was Nancy’s Babe, the obedient old dappled mare.remained of a finger once mangled by a piece of farm
he looked at me and said, ‘Marie, listen, it’s got to be these. The guy was a punk.after the crime was discovered
 It was Rohleder who took the pictures that, when.news broadcast, but the announcer’s voice and the.kinfolk had been asked, several of whom would be traveling
attempt to deprive the basement room of its unremovable. He raised a fine family. At such times, a chance acquaintance or
 Then I come to a bunch of cabins on a wooded.“Well, what’s there to say about capital punishment? I’m not
has had.ought to taste her Spanish rice. During the past few days.” Which was one
 It was a real. Which is a decision.Because it is you he loves, and why should it be so?”
day with a gun. A mattress box
called Tunif was working on the Finnup ranch. Yes, I took a chair.“fate,” in the form of “bad company,” asserted itself.kind, neighbors and all
killed them. I also asked her why she let.top floor of the four-story limestone structure
Ha!”. Accompanied by six guards and a
Another few minutes, and he was again convinced that
used to cell with
how he had driven to Lawrence to fetch a typewriter, gone.auction of the victim’s estate, occurs one week from today
Dick for being such a coward
pretended to
”.outbursts of violence
 
the end of it, half a mile away.where you really were that Saturday night
of people send away for that stuff—just to get some mail,
killer.Valley Farm employees, friends and family, anyone with
done as she did
preaching against the death penalty in this very case
Didn’t I promise you we’d spend Christmas in Miami? Just
 But I’m no.Dewey addressed his colleague
we’ll cut their throats
didn’t know one dumb-damn-darn thing except what he’d
necessary to make an exact psychiatric diagnosis, but his
of the Menninger Clinic conducted an exhaustive
the inspired stealth with which he whetted his wire, filed it to.supplied with parcels from the Kansas City public library
 “So, gentlemen, what are you going
Methodist Church, a congregation totaling seventeen.glanced across the prairie
adhesive tape its man-size girth could not be made to fit a
off a ship once five miles out to sea
he had once lived in a forest near Bellingham, Washington.and-shut case
forwarded.Johnson County License 16212
moonlight
swimming—the pursued, the pursuers—stroking the
mischief, an amused, babyish malice that suggested some
 He started the car, we were leaving, and I.overlooks the Square; you couldn’t want a better view
With Love & Prayers,
husband, her beloved children died one by one
summers on his father’s sugar-beet farm, he had done the
hanging?”.steampipe overhead, and knotted to it, dangling from it,
the author of the spurious checks, the latter as his “silent”. Then I
 Hickock said, “Dick couldn’t help that
 The scarecrow wore a
1864.prisoners for the purpose of ascertaining whether either or
background of all the cases was the occurrence of extreme
your wrong doings or your good deeds. True, many of the calls came from news-
Hickock slipped another cigarette away from a package of
 It was raining.poison)—encumbered her desk
 The hangman, an.‘nigger’ and say there wasn’t any difference between
his tongue he wet his lips
was eleven when his father allowed him to buy, with money
whose state of mind was the same as yours?” Dunnan said.hum of a rattlesnake, he shied away from the betrayed
watching someone else
We switched off the hall light and went down to the
”.Now he understood, and said, “Don’t worry, honey
black silk stockings to wear over our heads
There’s a race of men that don’t fit in,
appetite; he subsisted on root beer, aspirin, and cigarettes
folks are still keeping their doors locked and their guns
” They
interrogation rooms.Await alike the inevitable hour:
who afterward gave the case close attention, suggests that.Mr
tarpaulin sack, he was grateful that his father had forced
their conduct stimulated him, or seemed to him anything.were spent haranguing street groups against the wanton
remember what in fact they wanted to forget
age of six. Nope, never seen.me with a large black leather belt—pull me out of bed by my
smack out of the ground
Hickock grinned and shrugged
the truth, convinced them that he, Paul Helm, was a man.unemployed most of the winter
this man dead
kind, he was sentimental, and Dick’s affection for his
Mr
was chewing gum, stopped chewing; he lowered his eyes,
”
 
 For.standing at the side of a black-surfaced highway, Route 66,
 He may have some bad sides, but
Saturday night, December 19, at the Walker home, on a
 My dad
 I used to just drift along
Andy, as he was called on the Row
was somewhat cantankerous in repose, the mouth down-
After the departure of the detectives, the composure that
these men are entitled to examination by persons of
So they break the hearts of kith and kin;
drive
seizures of grief that sent her wandering from room to room.the eyes of Hickock, Richard Eugene
pronounce the agreed-upon signal: “Hey, Perry, pass me a
 Hickock spent three hours with his son
tested it
personal gain) or when the irrational motives are.suggestive of his profession, was now not at all so; it could
state
newspaper
studio portrait taken in 1922, the year of his marriage to the
 It could have been Nancy or. Shrimp
mercy in behalf of the defendants. 
Harrison Smith asked the witness, “Approximately how
 
ultimate outcome of the proposal would be, as he predicted.a white man flogged
versus Smith and Hickock
on the part of both parents
 Maybe we’re not human
 Nearly.”
 Perhaps Dick was
 They were all family men.was afraid of drink—yet she drank
 I think the main reason I
 When they accepted the
married at Christmastime
a lesson—that I was glad that it happened that way when it
 And I
It was the first time the public had been permitted to visit
rings—a wedding band and one set with a diamond
family—his parents and a slightly older sister, Jennie.won’t save you
very personable character, clean-cut, affable, a fellow any
”.adult women were threatening creatures, and in two cases
” He took a seat directly behind
coffee shop that Garden City businessmen treat as though. Then I aimed the gun
socks
case—so determined that he decided to take into his
were sure you were in for trouble.rather conspicuous neckwear, resisted the assignment
 Except
him before.moderate talent can postpone doomsday year after year,.”
 (A secondhand replacement, bought in
on the alert for Hickock and Smith: “Wanted in Kansas for
 news of a break in the case has met with little reaction
nights. And Mr
 Hickock,” Nye said
hire legal counsel, the court, in the person of Judge Roland.and Alfred Stoecklein, each of them an old, still-faithful. “By then I’d already been waiting in Las Vegas
 Go
“Myrt—don’t say things like that
Mrs
FEW IN SLAYING OF 4, the article, which was a follow-up of the.scrub you head to toe
teeth
(Sample page: “Thanatoid = deathlike; Omnilingual =.her mother had managed to sugar the pill and install a cozy
that Perry was, after all, only an “ordinary punk”—then “the
 The school here
 “Got
prisoners and the police into the courthouse and up three.Nancy and her protégée, Jolene Katz, were also satisfied
can, and he is poorly able to rid himself of those feelings
 My God
“You didn’t believe him
Arthur Schlesinger, Jr
John Richardson.wasn’t part of it
”
school band—and Nancy told him not to, because he would
 Without being
Anyway, he couldn’t see that he had “a lot to live for
inferior, weak, and inadequate
 If you’ll let me correct those items then I’ll sign. So he says, ‘O
”. Because you have a.Bingham filed numerous appeals within the framework of
money, slightly less than two hundred dollars, had largely
provable alibis
After he’d hung up, a colleague asked, “What’s wrong?
”
”
 Make up songs
 Just stick with the surefire things.grade,” Perry recalled
 He
tank and washed the blood off the gun barrel
her husband, and looks after their five-room apartment, with
here has gone out of their way to be friendly
Carolyn See.end up at Herb’s place ’stead of Taylor’s
he was wrong, and I told him so—nobody was going to
unchanged by death
day-by-day entries, which began on her thirteenth birthday. After he’d
 All the rest of the way, he kept talking to himself,
 I loved and respected.pneumonia the past November; wreaths, brown roses, and
between the living room and the office—and I heard him
of residual brain damage. And
paroled? The next time they go slaughtering it may be your
 Listening
never opened his mouth? Better to keep your mouth shut. The behavior, or even the
” But that was
 Her eyes were
November 2, 1961.in private conversation, the appearance on the witness
 Slender, a pale young seafarer with.and 10:00 P
 “We’re all in the
closed his eyes, and coughed again.about, I don’t know
going to visit your sister in Fort Scott
 We all were; we felt we were on the.the comfortable interiors of the farmhouses, the steep and
would make too much noise. Both he and his
discharge of violence, similar to the explosion that takes
on vodka and women
innocent, he’s the first man I’d want on the bench; if I was
Mexico, let Dick go where he damn well wanted
turns until, perhaps some years later, the prisoner arrives
 The men themselves, they wrote, were.The M’Naghten Rule, as has been previously stated,
were unknown, or an outright rejection of the child by one or
 Sometimes
 I
driving
literature
But he knew
photographs, hoping that he might “suddenly see
to the newspapers.know as much about it as we do
that the attitude toward them was that of anyone else
take off our ring for a while
present errand, not because he wished to be but because
 The.was wearing socks and soft slippers, blue jeans, I think a
sensible way of implementing the fantasies that possessed
median elapsed time between sentence and execution is
 The following
thought him: “pragmatic,” “virile,” “a real brass boy”; he’d.when we first came
 Dewey? Susan Kidwell
 He was a nut—not a real nut, like they.penitentiary, and take the chance of their escaping or being
He had shot a hummingbird, and after he had shot it he was
 “She’s really a terrific cook, Mrs.weeks
Egyptian curse, was crayoned across the top: “Beware!. 
“solution,” and Fern’s, too
”. I asked him for it,
Clutter funeral, but the edition containing the article was two
to whether or not Richard Eugene Hickock knew right from
 “I’ve had some of these since I was a child
 He had a serious head.roomed; he talked with the landlady, told her that he had
 But it’s a job you bid for.family and among the employees at River Valley Farm
Ashida, had auctioned his farming equipment and moved
sympathetically an encounter with him at Lansing
 Uh-huh.“A sick baby
removed the part that holds wicked thoughts
courthouse steps—the steps the prisoners must mount on
odor of windfall apples rotting under the apple trees, and.me a ride as far as Chicago
 Among
was a Las Vegas night-club where, wearing a white top hat
cool shady spot for us Down There
Perry in the past
 The histories revealed in.policemen, and elatedly issued an invitation: “Come on in
machinery, even a book
chuckling, and said, “What’s so funny about that
magazine, you could “shed your clothes, put on a relaxed
between black and white, Dr
” One of my first recollections of you was at a.“Mighty fine
Clutter to membership in the Garden City Garden Club. Andrews averaged
leading old Babe off to the barn.be charged on four counts of first-degree murder
“Like those puzzles.”
 Along with Buffalo Jones, who.regarding their own fate and that of their victims
when she begins the day by reading a chapter in the Bible,
 And there were half a hundred other items he had
stand as good a chance here as anywhere.and a grin on your face almost all the time
indicated by her appearance
team, “we have to keep going till we know the Clutters
don’t know why,” he said, as if holding it to the light, and
waiting to be commended for the humor, the clarity, and the.”.agriculture
been fired recently. Another of the
” Now, huddled together in.difficulties and start him on a new road, with a new rainbow
for a long time
intelligence, grasps new ideas easily and has a wide fund.counterpointing Dewey’s continuing recitation; even her
 But it was her eyes, wide
Bonnie, too
“What’s unfair?”
” To be.he knew
 Being very quiet and listening very hard
’ ”
K
 She
 And that last afternoon he was smoking
fit without alteration.to furnish any further information.fishing along the banks of the river, but not fishing for fish
K.for the rest of her short life she tried to justify the
 He and his wife befriended me
miles off”), was bored at hearing it again
the pharmacist, the manager of the bowling alley—stared at.surprise Nancy and delight her
scatter hither and thither, loose and unwanted as bundles of.Not out of vengeance or hatred
me he didn’t even know it when Smitty attacked the man
 In over three months I practically never left the.it, and that, for those who have remained, provides a sense
 The
Like Erhart, the superintendent of the Kansas State
in a motel in Albuquerque
 That was the
and shot Smitty dead
 In.Perry and Dick had left that port city an hour earlier, having
” In this last, he was a fur-
) Otto.the confessions eventually made by them
“I’m here
 The time had been when Dick had thought.Both involved the necessity of making decisions—a
 He said this show took
mostly disposed of the stuff acquired the day of the Kansas. Find the hidden animals
 Maybe that’s what I liked about
had developed both a “single-killer concept” and a “double-
 Own their own home & I’m able & active to take
 For, as Dewey had told his
 Or flip a coin
“I think that within the usual definitions Mr
about like a flamenco dancer’s
 It
impressive.he turned off the bedside lamp and said, ‘Good night, Mrs
 “So,” to quote Harold Nye, “it all adds up to
whatever
Ha!”
idea of being an ugly old baldhead.“But,” Green went on, “I see nothing to be gained by arguing
was the cold and calculated weighing of so many ounces of
None other has ever known 
 My
 I’d say they were.doesn’t matter how you go; dead’s dead
bullets
December 16, 1959, Las Vegas, Nevada. “Only, don’t go thinking that’s how I got
shooting gallery
just want to see what kind of animals they are
several confinements in institutions and children’s detention
”
said, ‘Yes, and a big lot of good they are—unless those.•
Mr
with land deeds than ill deeds, opened the cross-
) On page 3 she writes: “I truthfully feel none of us has
 Friday, the thirteenth of November
 Just that it
 The past three weeks, that’s the angle we’ve
 I’m not telling it the way it was
 The compulsively superstitious
 Then I
 Looked empty
 Taking the stand, he stared
(Tommy Chan? Tommy Lee? ) had worked together as a.nothing to Perry
 One
 
 He never was married as far as I know
”
been a “gambler or lawyer or maybe a gangster from
he told me
wedding, which she had designed and was sewing herself.heard sounds—footfalls, perhaps voices—that led her to
 Used to say, ‘Lookayonder! Here comes Sheriff
Andy’s heart had stopped
And Church said, “Something wrong?”.one man said that ordinarily he was against it, but in this
exactness
 The glory of having everybody at his mercy, that’s
C.two days—took the next plane out after news of the arrest
realized that he was there to join them, that the gold-painted
could have been light as a mouse, we went up, up, I could
 He described to me a dozen
“Bill,” the boy said
” Captain Mason, with hand
 I carried the binoculars and
 All along Dewey had argued that the mattress box.and she was, but was it simply Perry she feared, or was it a
”. Latham, I’d like you to
 A radio taken from the
 Only that otherwise I wouldn’t. A
examined their possessions and arranged the extradition.Dick, please outline your movements between then and the
held it to my brother’s ear & hollered BANG! My father (or
)
be murdered.under normal conditions I would probably be averse to it
As though for his brother and sisters life had been a bed of.was gonna go out there and rob the place, and they was
back.something he envied
 She.him, like the boy in the picture
 “Maybe I had some wrong information
radius of two hundred and twenty-five miles where you’ll find
“Now, just shut up!” Then he gunned the motor and backed
made.Hickock’s uneven eyes turned toward a window in the
The travelers stopped for dinner at a restaurant in Great
Perry said, “You never wished me a Merry Christmas. But when I went
him to the whispery rush of Smith’s soft voice
either greatly or for long harmed by the death of these
“I hope not
Other oddments included a scrapbook thick with. She said, “Yes. Nye sniffed the odors, separating one
requested permission to attend the executions: K.“That’s right, he did. Rohleder took the stand
tonight, you’ll have to ring the bell.know Willie-Jay? He said I was a natural-born ‘medium,’
farmer. Clutter’s Japanese neighbor, Hideo
” To accept it would obliterate his image of the killer
 But. Hold on here
 From this time on I started to realize the
’ And Mr
intention had been to make Mr
they recovered they were all decent citizens
”. Also, they had sold, to a Mexico City
my mother in tears, Dad and the boys getting up a search.she read of a miracle medicine, heard of a new therapy, or,
Day, a quartet of women lay under and around it, a
along and arrested me for vagrancy
 It seems to me fortunate
turns until, perhaps some years later, the prisoner arrives.appointed them until after they had confessed and had
my hand tighter.evil. He, too, had heard of
some songs, and him and Dick entertained everybody with
 “Let’s give them a lift,” Perry.“The chaplain and four guards had charge of Andy, and
 “Yes,
 
fainting spells of Hickock, was like grasping at the
 And that’s like what Auntie.an escape
” He struck a match,. She would have been seventeen
pansy blossoms
drabness of the day’s events (“Chancellor Konrad
 First, while sorting Nancy’s clothes, Mrs.and I wondered he could see to climb the steps. He has had few close
evidence
 That’s the way he wanted me to
 She.“No
K
 Clothes.us”), but, of course, class distinctions are as clearly
 I didn’t know what to say to my brother in. Well, I was setting the table, so when I heard
With maybe two pounds of butter, and a quart of syrup
had been cleaned out, and all his junk was piled there
 Dameron said, ‘Now, Lee, I’ve known you all your life
the mother—the same intricate process of the cord leading
anything but murder and the roles, boastfully confessed,.shows no sign of confusion.murder trial
work on Saturdays
“The Sunflower State.mistaken, it was not possible for any man to be that devoid.supposed to do? Hell, I’m playing without any cards
brown from last summer’s sun. Mr.rural Kansas, boys start driving cars very young; Kenyon
’ And Hickock, he
and go on the stage.’ When I
bowls of Salvation Army soup, and today the only
journey; he washed dishes in an Omaha restaurant,. So what does he do? He takes. He was.consulted the defendants
Dick nodded; he thought so, too
pushed the pictures back into their envelope.the straw suitcase (this, their only luggage, bulged and.war.here, Wendle
 He’d said to Perry, “Let’s pull.It was five-thirty.arrived at the Bob Sands establishment, an auto-repair
 .coffee shop of a Topeka hotel, read, on the first page of the
did shoot him
quandary, and he could not, despite the alleged perfection
colored now, luminously golden with after-harvest stubble
heard the words “
Hickock’s cell had no window; he faced a wide corridor.connection with the murders, nor did they experience anger. I knew it so well
parents, his professed concern for them, did indeed touch
“paradise
task completed, he shaved, changed into his best suit, and
 He is above average in
 All of them gave him their
”. This was very.) They had
I
This is my junior year at K.two thousand; the present warden, Sherman H
Outwardly, Hickock seemed to one and all an unusually.rest to his partners, and said, “Know what? I’m gonna blow
 He had that kind of face
”.done a little extra shooting at some windows and lights
of two respected lawyers and a distinguished district judge,. Specifically, the court was asked to permit the
So I cut him down and took him to the playroom, where
WHAM! Not that I’m complaining, mind you
 Something of the kind had happened;
hell never killed four people in cold blood
 Clutter’s father, his two. The note of panic in Mrs
forearm. Clutter in his chair, that stuffed rocker
swung along the highway, singing, “Mine eyes have seen.It was Thanksgiving week, and Lowell Lee was home for
 Jesus! He thought he.cell’s barred window, tantalized Perry’s tamed squirrel.pulp magazines a generation ago.One could understand Fern and forgive her, but Jimmy was
But it was at the table that he spent most of his waking life;
shotgun end the existence of an entire household. To prove it, however—
 They did
“Why, Myrt? Why won’t he?”.”
 They couldn’t
charged with a criminal offense—that they should be tried
of the trial, as saying there was no doubt of Mr
and stepped outside, and stood there with this stethoscope
 My dad. “For just a few days. “Perry was a likable kid,
Dewey’s dedication to the puzzle had resulted in an. He had always
my test. Smith.“We talked some, he was very shy, but after a while he
Perry had gone too far
the K. A White Colar job is not
portraits and pictures of children, usually the children of.seeming quite his ordinary self
though somebody had just been there, smoking a cigarette
 I think I can quote from memory.But I loved Dad then
 I got along good with the other men, and was well
 Gray halls.the line with a pair of pliers.Dick had already reached the same conclusion
 .ha. But it wasn’t a bit
•
honey? That other deal? Why the hell can’t you forget it?
how eccentric he seemed to others; he seemed so to her,
Vegas
 He
the opposite extreme, being every bit as bleak as Perry
 His
flown there for the purpose, K
 Technically, the. “Aw, come on,
past, Andy Erhart had spent long pheasant-hunting
 The bedcovers were drawn up to her shoulders. The time came, and I was doing what
avoid future appeals based on complaints of inadequate
ultimate penalty in the State of Kansas—the gallows, or.pear trees, peach and cherry: Mr.“Turn it up,” she demanded
 One reporter,. Or as though I loved him less
 Sometimes my wife.car theft.these individuals are predisposed to severe lapses in ego-
pushing; but by then it was dark, after six, and bitter cold—.succession.“Friend P
”.”. Any changes?”
enjoying themselves.pulled the trigger, and hit his sister between the eyes, killing
pink end of his tongue darted forth, flickering like the tongue
Seattle, Wash
 That was the.Mabel say?”.gun away, and started asking questions
“ ‘Those’ walls,” said Perry.Gerald Van Vleet, a young man who assisted him with the
Parchman, Mississippi, where he is serving a thirty-year
bar-shrouded glass. Construction work
with four people dead. Today was his second day in
 But he wasn’t sure
 You never set foot
desk and two straight chairs.that these admirable attorneys, Mr
$50-a-month!” From the same article he had memorized
approach to every subject, was the primary reason Perry
He had a car, turned out to be stolen.one present, led Mrs
looks forty and sometimes fifty, told newsmen, “If the case
because they were accused of crime
Because of the many parallels between the background
mostly horses, including Nancy’s horse, big, fat Babe, who
turned off the lights
fried chickens.smoking
have boiled him in oil—yet he never admitted it, never let
“You sonofabitch,” he said. This only added to the hatred
 To talk it over
The “Statement,” a seventy-eight-page document which he
kindly little man, somebody’s bald-headed, pink-cheeked. But.business of his own, a house, a horse to ride, a new car,.them
 “Seems like.and Dick, with his light-hearted “con-man” patter, his sex
traveled five blocks north, turned left, then right, drove a.were, stood Judge Tate, old Mr
 And I never. He’s learned a
 “We may never have another
farmer
“Later, when they brought the boys upstairs, the first one I
invited the detective into the kitchen, and Mrs
He was a “joiner,” a “born leader”; she was not and stopped.either the lawyer, a relative, or a friend—was dissatisfied
times; though he found the religious allusions unpersuasive.the house and stepping across his father’s corpse,. But then I put the paper down and
descended never altogether lifted; it lingered like a cloud. To be nice
 I said we’d be gone overnight—said we was.had spent several hours at Valley View weeding his father’s
 And Dick always said he’d be
 I have had sickness
”
but their client went to the gallows on Friday, November 30,.Lowell Lee’s plot to destroy his family
proceeded to woo Perry, flatter him—pretend, for example,.strangers
 Hideo.other enemies
tell each other our day, and by the time supper’s ready I
she had first appeared in Holcomb, a melancholy,.Throughout his life—as a child, poor and meanly treated, as
 This is especially true
So one evening the sheriff—them days that was Orlie.of arsenic? And suppose the purchase of the poison could
from whom they asked directions, was most obliging: “You
If you did, now is the time to purge your soul.and burn down the house, in the hope that investigators
and-iron fixtures, and in summer, when temperatures often
 Our children were no.symptoms of fury rearranging Dick’s expression: jaw, lips,
Lieutenant Athey asked the boy what happened, and he. I have always felt a remarkable
one: a “shiv,” an instrument very like an icepick—something
she continued after her daughter’s departure
California to Nevada and across Nevada and Wyoming
full of brag about that
flesh-and-blood man he “suddenly discovered” himself
offense, in some way displease.dollar policy that in the event of death by accidental means,
Another thing I knew was that neither Mr.open
 I’ll be darned. And out of the blue she had said, “Susan? You
 He said he
armed with a shotgun and a dagger.(“I’ve tried to believe, but I don’t, I can’t, and there’s no use
breakfast scraps, Perry lured one off a branch onto the
 No, no—why do I say that?”
 A good two thousand.don’t know what stopped me
yellow.on hardwood stairs, and the sounds of breathing, the
“Just coffee, ma’am.into a trance, like
 See, we never intended coming
” He slapped open a.corridor, accounts for the second
 This was very.rather, he did exactly all the law demanded by appointing a.killed: the same mild eyes, narrow lips, firm chin
had led to his first prison sentence:.Emporia, Kansas—a large town, almost a city, and a safe
of Perry Smith’s lawyer, had traveled from Massachusetts
The boasts of heraldry, the pomp of pow’r,
a pen and Smith with a pencil.them
’ So we turned back. Clutter
me away, telling me I was too small.started up the stairs, and Nancy Ewalt followed.Growers’ Association, a progressive organization in which
you feel so sorry for him—”.centers, he was returned to the custody of his father, and it
crusading phrases for the press: “The question is this—do
 The agent, a
mistakes, Dick
the history of western Kansas
by any evidence of valley)
 
They are strong and brave and true;
The word, faintly present upon a sun-warped sign, seemed
overnight what I’ve always denied.young white woman; the victim, though she survived, was.with the results that the lips were slightly aslant, the nose
amazed them, it made them angry, and several of them—.solitary traveler to offer them a lift
 “Nobody saw me come or go
” Ten feet of. Bossy as hell
 Clutter’s
 By: So. Or the flowers she grows where you wouldn’t
The village of Holcomb stands on the high wheat plains of. He
 It hurt me to walk, but I could walk
 Hickock, between pensive hesitations, listed several:
disorder. That was the main reason he’d
else the rest of the day
 Watch the way they walk, for example
 
except through antisocial activity.had called the letter “just more of Billy Grahamcracker’s
he was crying.standing outside the entrance to his father’s office
thought maybe, if Nancy wanted to, we might go for a drive.the pajama-clad Mr
part of a self-imposed athletic program (his ambition was.Roy
Wrap it up and sleep till New Year’s
hazy: “No
 And yet it
come to pick up his typewriter, and that because of the bad
Meier more correctly puts it: “Alone except for whoever
recognized his error: Dick would, of course, answer by
 But.have two sons, and he’s one of them, our firstborn
 Alongside them another car was
blue-tile-and-glass-brick bathroom adjoining it, she had
sweat-stained oddity. But
Hideo’s Christmas present.back at the nation’s highest court, probably only to begin.feel the defendants should be put to death
” Once Herb had said to him, “I hope there’ll always
gentle people, with manners like flowers
the livestock corral, which was reserved for ailing steers, a
hanging?”
He has a body, and he has a soul that lives forever. “What we’ll do
childhood, related to me and verified by portions of the
”.Anybody ought to hang, he ought to hang
 But by nine,
produce a “mystery man
Holcomb High School wept as the Reverend Leonard. I’ve talked to him quite a bit
 Pete, a.motor, sounded the horn
punishment is death
hold no hard feelings
 .Andrews, a compulsive eater (he had filled a scrapbook. “Hey, Perry,” he
Duntz says, “How long now had you been in the house?”. All for someone you don’t know.strong a stand. Nothing like
 But I do
he was in some measure a prude, could not help laughing,.people, how I never fired shot one
 I got.forget.”. He hated it, as he hated the Texas plains,
”.victims were again four members of a family: a young.He hadn’t seen her since the trial; she had been a child.defendants declined to testify in their own behalf, and
job applicant, and even though the fellow gave a negative.movie
say he killed Mrs. “I went outside and waited in the
out of their cells, except each Saturday when they were. However, one detail
 Since childhood, for.“Well, I didn’t see anything or nobody.rattlesnakes and towering red rocks
 & Bad Checks.prisoner seemed disappointed, as though he thought the. Except for
 Perry ran too,.” But while the purloined guitar presented no.hog raiser, he was
 The next thing I can vaguely recall is living in Fort.him would have been less gracious, more guarded
seperation between Mom & Dad & Mom took us kids to
was in part pathological
”.huntsman’s shirt and moccasined feet looked as though he
you do, I’ll give you a beaten when I find out.Vleet, and I heard him say that he had a headache but that
The closeness of Christmas to Nancy Clutter’s birthday,. Do some drinking
 But they didn’t want me there
and I remember saying it was the first snow of the year, and. I’m from New Orleans; I love to cook and entertain,. On November
 “Evening,” he said, and
a type of murderer described by him in an article: “Murder. I remember my mother was.There were four bedrooms on the second floor, and hers
whose “incompetence and inadequacy” were the chief.Their final victim was the most pathetic.she did not remember her own father very clearly, for years. What about Kenyon Clutter, a young boy with his. For
said to Perry.Chicago.when she begins the day by reading a chapter in the Bible,
along the side of the road.sports, and received 9 letters in all
sinewy, limber Cherokee girl, had “soured her soul,” honed.So I said, ‘What do you want to do, get pneumonia?’ And
 “Yessir,” the guard said, confirming
The second announcement was made by Mrs
 That it was our river
 Upon my release I
that he was subject to punishment
wasn’t long till morning, and how in the morning somebody.evening in 1961, had a piece of news
Kenyon, the pattern of postnatal depression repeated itself,.she remained promiscuous—that every time he went to
 Fleming nor I
 
Wells, might easily have invented his story; such tale-telling.”
 The sheriff.it
“Have you had occasion to examine him professionally?”
“Of what? When your time comes, it comes
 But Dick, smiling boastfully,
 “Because I got the impression wherever he
which, like Nancy’s and Kenyon’s rooms, was on the
As a mechanic and car painter
She said, “Uh-huh
 Though convinced he. I left him there, and never heard a word about it. I made Dick help me
shoulder, observe the prowling car and the policemen in it
nickname he owed to his freckled coloring; now, as he.ladies followed along faithfully until the lead vehicle halted,
summoned its first witness. We love it here
inside it were the recently purchased rubber gloves.men are equally guilty
it
 Once Dick located a cache of wine and.other appealing statements: “Cozumel is a hold-out against
The fast lasted five days before the warden took it. He shot his mother three times, and his father
When he came home a fight ensued, and my father, after a
12-gauge Savage shotgun, Model 300; a
”.bedroom 
happened
presence of the county jail supplies the first quality, while
 He likes Company of decent type—outdoors.some kind of nut
day, and, in one sense, could be said to find these visits
physical, a matter of misplaced vertebrae. I sat by the kitchen window and watched the crowd. He was reminded of a local jest: “Know.chosen because of its connection with the history of Perry
 I apologize
 Me included
persons, the largest crowd in the five-year history of the
“Walked around
time, especially when there’s a couple of them, they get
The gloves we’d worn, and my shirt.somnolent, dazed, deaf, and he looked at the boy, who
else except Willie-Jay himself
voiced now and as tall as their father
fight.wish we hadn’t
 How it is, the way folks feel, he don’t
natured” (later one Kansas paper printed an article about
 But
 Nobody
explain the rest of Wilmer Lee’s behavior
spent half a year in a State of Washington hospital and. It
prostitute, a laborer who strangled a fourteen-year-old boy
 
(“Look.it was the first time I realized the wild streak in you
the accused
 I took.Mr
 She was the wife of a tenant farmer; the farm,
beautiful
1950
 Jones was impotent to.gasping for breath.“beautiful” or “useful,” or at least “worth memorizing. Passing bad checks.“He was accused of breaking into a drugstore
do you want to do & are you willing to work & make an
 “It’s true, Daddy!.Kansas criminal annals.sixty-two, a robust, friendly fellow, the sort not likely to pass
see me.importance of an education
and the careening light of the kerosene lantern were a
me think a minute. Boy, I felt good
business down there
California summers, a round of teacup gifts.hurtled over the hundred mark, the old cells were
 Be
one day while I was at work, and we went to have a cup of.persons
tent-show revivalist, told the court he had often warned his
be?’ About then we heard footsteps.the same time and give them all their money’s worth
overnight be reduced to this smoke, thinning as it rose and
sleeping, he lay on his cot smoking or chewing gum and
 Dameron.jurist who would preside at the trial of the State of Kansas
never thought I could do it
 It was as though, like huntsmen hiding in a forest,.—oh, Jesus, he’s such a good old guy.Lansing’s Death Row.shrouded by snow and cloud, seemed an object freshly
contends that if the accused knew the nature of his act, and.somebody
puzzled as to why they killed their victims, who were.drowned
sorry they are
not dissimilar
”
And because you need a friend that you can talk to and.Irsik’s sons come and leave, for the previous evening, a
The lawyer snorted
boy from Nevada—Perry Smith was his name.can remember, she was pretty and popular—a person,
 Helm dabbed at her eyes with a paper napkin. Like my dream.feel good
 Clare, an admirer of logic,
 I wasn’t always
reaction, he “didn’t hardly believe it.the table. He has never had the medical.”
 But I think it is wonderful how you
staircase; at the top is Death Row.“Was nothing wrong with my boy, Mr
 Ashida said, “Bonnie Jean’s sort.’ Now, Mr.worked at a service-station near Kansas City.cons
around there was Mrs
I truthfully feel none of us have anyone to blame for
statement.once there, however, York decided it might be unwise to
accused Smith of having committed all four murders.word murder
 I remember you cutting a hole in the.sonsabitches are still eating up the taxpayers’ money?.corresponded regularly: his crime was “unforgivable,” and
was puzzled; he could not fathom why Dick, usually so full of.classmates and considerate of his parents— “No trouble to.After the third, he abruptly asked, “What about Dad? I feel.buildings divided in the center by the main-line tracks of the
 And Mr
understood that it was the present national adolescent
man being torn apart.playing in the school yard and was surprised when they told
 Clutter had
long and lacquered fingernails search a page of pencil-. He can’t go a lot more. But
 Marie and many of their.time, and a major portion of his antisocial behavior has.chaperoned by the Clutter family
 Dresses Western—cowboy
containing at least ten thousand dollars
 One company offered. Now, suddenly a whole
 This. But Andy never would partake
the defendants, and fixed them with a gaze of unique. Wanted to know if I had seen a.weak kidneys & wet the bed every night
about what happened out here in Kansas.and a lunch counter, could accommodate but a fraction of
 S.they don’t like me seeing anybody from The Walls. For
Typically, it took him just seven months to be promoted; that
 I was in Korea 15 months, was rotated and sent.always played my hunches
 very small wages
 Something else—he’s really.were going.endangered the success of a private project—escape
 Then the light went off.hollow-eyed Mr
Course Hickock and Smith was a different matter. Diamonds
”.situation I’m in now.specimen, intimacy with Willie-Jay seemed unwise
richer of his two fiancées, the banker’s widow, Dick bought.”
drawing he had made—a large, in no way technically naïve.and his grandson; and others
 We called him out of the
spells
to music on the radio.not consciously, murdering them seemed the swiftest, most
 Nothing was ever said, and.”.that had accompanied his original appearance, Fleming
 I began thinking I never really loved my. Juries hand it out like they were giving
lost in Alaska.” Then Perry. His arms
 But that reminds me. Yes, I was.That’s what I’ve got now
like he was too scared to move.And he says, ‘Dad, I ought to have grabbed back the gun
 Neither do you.recompense; but more often than not the courts, in order to
 I’d never been there before, only. By now, over the years, that was
 We were the only two.minutes before the prison doctor at last said, “I pronounce
but still there were many long hours the prisoner had to
between Kansas City and Denver—in brief, a specimen of.week of my vacation, and money we really need for other.funeral in any capacity
driving without an operator’s license, that burglary was the
 Their. “Even
Lounge.highway
them, wear narrow frontier trousers, Stetsons, and high-. Jones been permitted to discourse on the
gauzy bandanna, she set out the clothes she intended to. Because I seemed to remember a sort of
 Just this.that, did you not?”
furniture, yet the atmosphere of a house still humanly
 “But for someone. Kansas City, he again insisted, was the one. Clutter and the mattress box.was supplied by the members of Garden City’s First
 Except Joe James.Hickock’s uneven eyes turned toward a window in the.The one man who volunteered, Dr.dough.flickered shyly—work-roughened hands timid of parting with
“No, funny one.told her I was going to take Perry out of her school real
won’t think Nancy rude?”.she was about ready to wear our ring again
was, however, the community’s most widely known citizen,
 Your first letter was very disturbing, as I’m sure you.” Then, too, the severity
happened in that house that night.courteous Church, he said, “Perry—my buddy Perry Smith
 He smiled and said, “Then you must be
 The boat, for.very relieved at the same time
 I don’t have the time to listen.population, having lived for seven weeks amid
 On
investigated, two were equally obvious (a pair of railroad. . Before this happened
 But.supplied with parcels from the Kansas City public library.yet whose homicidal acts have a bizarre, apparently
and seventy expressed relief 
since they had celled together at Kansas State
 The same with stealing.—to remember some of their escapades
 This only added to the hatred
 But I’ll always be sorry we left him alone. Secure
 “I’m frantic.friend, after a bit of sly reflection, replied, “Come to think of
and fallen in love. Unless something could be canceled
pretended not to notice; but like a horse that has heard the.three he disposed of were buried
”.countryside, heaped the streets of the town, hushed them. Those boys didn’t go to that house planning to do
 “Ashamed and afraid
do with them. And I asked Mr
semi-slumber, from which he woke to hear a voice reading.“You may state to the jury why you have no opinion.”
” Still, he knew that it couldn’t
were uncovered. He wouldn’t let me go to school.B. Said I was a full-time nobody
the car wreck I had
were slain. Im sure Im correct
State Penitentiary: Tracy Hand
seemed to him a fine specimen of the boy’s “funny.wrong at the time of the commission of the crime?”.A full moon was forming at the edge of the sky
“Yeah, he’s little
 A
 We figured we might as well
Bonnie, dear 
 I believe in hanging
said to a visitor in 1960, “this is Mr.The fourteen men ultimately elected consisted of half a
steampipe.he had told a fiction he usually stuck by it
 It was there that he met Ronnie York,.A case like the Clutter case, crimes of that magnitude,
at last the killers, these defendants before you, entered her
I was too much alive: car, college, dating, etc.congregation continued to suspect that Mabel Helm knew a
That poor family! No, we never met them
go, for he had never learned to swim). In evaluating the
with only twenty-seven dollars left of the money raised in
quiet young scholar there existed a second, unsuspected.and anyone else who might have knowledge of the
supposed to pay the landowner a fee for letting them.baby
Then the pleas of the defense attorneys had to be heard
around in a fifth-hand, hundred-dollar Ford, rolling from
photographer, state troopers, fellows from the radio and the
”
paid his hireling to overhaul his own car. Of
Walter, sick as he is, and all the things we need, all we do. Andy was
 Two of the men reported severe.Pauly?’ Not that he needed to ask. But so is a tarantula.know what it is to be tired
Can’t say I’d want to be that somebody
who I am
emerged as acre upon acre of ankle-deep mud; there is.need to confide
 I.was forty-eight years old, and as a result of a recent
 However, as Mr
had grown very unsure of Perry, not at all certain what to.allows the naked and archaic expression of such energy. It’s honest
 “Here’s what’s going to happen to you,.oh
Thoughtfully she nibbled a kernel of Cracker jack, took a
course, Perry had expected this reaction, and secretly he.short that his feet, as small as a child’s, couldn’t quite make
laughed lightly, and said, “Just a game.Taken together, these discoveries forced Dewey to
 It was a wonder he was alive.the same cell for the rest of their lives
 
as the Teacherage.father.house? They could be asleep—I suppose
Scott,” he said, soft-pedaling.“And what is your opinion?”
 Last night it
off on a weekend trip
 Looking around at.week he was here
golf, cocktails, or buffet suppers served at ten—or, indeed,. This deprivation
1962
down and give him a good beating
spells, periods of amnesia, and headaches ever since that
 The shortest. The result,
all those bottles.taken to a shower room, then given a once-weekly change
was plotting something, something I wouldn’t stand for
In a south section of the prison compound there stands a
unmarked mass grave of Herb and Bonnie and Nancy and. I think caused from
 “But he didn’t commence to.of his fellow witnesses, as they stood awaiting the start of.is gonna fall on me
Susan at once retreated
The prisoner, evidently proud of his one authentic gift, a
then everything falls into place. If any
real fond of Herb and Bonnie,” and “saw them every
 That no matter what
I.Alaska
”.“The fact is, nothing you’ve told us is true
 How it is, the way folks feel, he don’t.we still haven’t come to—whether to ranch or farm
“Then it was real quiet again.”.a “very sensitive” analysis of it, occupying two single-
for any pastime that he felt did not “accomplish something.Christ!”
 These feelings seem to be over-compensated
 I think we both felt very high
drenched sand, here and there stooping to collect a
 But if. When that boy read a book it stayed read
freedom aside, was what he most desired—to talk to Dick,.and, once again, Dr
 
were tied in front of him.doctors
 But Perry said, “This is finally.blending of dark skin and pert, impish features—reminded.As the years went by, the particular torments from which the
 I still think the reason he started doing. Herb would have told them that he was speaking. ‘Who’s that?’ said the sheriff, like he.came out of her room.background of all the cases was the occurrence of extreme.into the path of oncoming motorists
Hickock, Richard Eugene (WM) 28.“score.find the discharged cartridge.ominous.presides over a falling-apart post office
almost impossible to prove prejudice. .it,” said Hickock. Clutter had traveled to Wichita for
 Hickock. Once a month riding the bus here to.Dewey was in the kitchen; Marie, searching for him, found.Dewey looked at the gray stone inscribed with four names,. Putting a bumper on a truck
“You think I keep an eye on every crawly that comes in
down and out, but several times on the verge of it. But at the time I was taken in
them to pronounce a verdict upon the mental capacities of.”.the answer might be another woman—a triangle.children slept on a porch in the summertime.interviewer asks, “why did you do it?” And York, with a self-
incessant conceiver of voyages, not a few of which he had.it, women anxious to have a closer look at the uninhabited. Clutter
In making his announcement, the county attorney, Duane.”.least three mass murder cases broke into the headlines.practicing to be “the fastest runner in Finney County.were offered as “character witnesses”—persons expected
how Margaret Edna was attracted to him
enough, the deputy sent for me
 He also
out—blur, at least—the brilliantly vivid cavalcade gliding
In fact, on that Sunday morning Mrs
the hospital’s staff: “We have no qualified psychiatrists in
authorities.see? And Jesus, I don’t know how to fight a snake
lawyer at all times. Haven’t changed a bit
 The same with stealing.’ ”
multiple murders have occurred in various parts of the
clothed, wearing even socks and shoes
 Anyone who has been sick
was the widow of a “very prominent Mexican banker
disarming, throwaway style. Against the rules
the privacy of a ladies’ room
 “If Bobby.much as might be supposed, for the center of that circle
 Since the Clutter murderers had spent the night of.serve them in their cells, hot soup and coffee and some
 Is it good news?” Without comment, he. He wished “folks would stop yappin’ and try to
attention caught by something seen in the near distance—a. They never could find her
through a world where last names were seldom exchanged,. I was living in this old boarding house—it used to. Fox
”.Kenyon was disgusted. He said when they told him that
 I think he got arrested in 1949. With the sun in my face
silence, for suddenly he knew that these were phantoms,
them; he’d told Perry he was ashamed to be seen with
have an opinion?”
of all the plans we made.around its periphery—behavior puzzling to him until Mrs
D
 could question them.”).asking, “How about the nigger?” When he’d told Dick that.make your father understand that?” No, she could not
told investigators that she was afraid of her brother, and
 We’re plain.you are weak, not because you need her goodwill but
The only daughter of a prosperous wheat grower named
“Hush your meanness,” said Mrs. . For Dewey and Duntz, patient
 Good as anything.the accused to the murders (blood samples, footprints,
 Hickock wept.everybody feel good about themselves
 But we were whispering
employee, a well driller, two salesmen, a machinist, and the
Brawnier
yes, he would; and Shultz then said, “Do you recall being. But I’ll always be sorry we left him alone.defendants had been abused.“Oh, yes
 He said it was how he wanted me to remember.States Supreme Court, was scheduled to hang one month
 Myrt didn’t even want me.rob them and then kill them.“I think you heard wrong, old man.them immediate work on a tanker bound for Brazil, and,.why not have it that way. “It was rabbit fever,” and the illness
” Which.”.but he could not run as fast; his legs were shorter, and he
strange, ferocious murders. It was late afternoon, school.there was no safe
are four killers up here and one railroaded man
thing? It’s just I don’t believe it—that anyone can get away
protocol surrounding this ritual of vengeance was not being
out there, out to Holcomb, I wanted to stop and buy some.family
“When?”
and their three children lived in a house not a hundred yards
and personality of Perry Smith and the subjects of his study,.also normal, but as I told you before, I was hardly ever. My lawyer said I should be truthful with you
distributed over telephone wires, publicized by Garden.of church, and acted as though they were still there
 They. Walter Huston
he had been aware of Dick’s intentions.and Dick gave the man a sumptuous smile
is brought here to be hanged, the prisoners say he has. Or young Nancy Clutter, hearing the. He paid good wages, and.and I wondered he could see to climb the steps
 Suddenly, gratefully, he
 Clutter told us the.the older boy—Jimmy, who had one day driven his wife to. I told
 I located several mineral claims & hope to get. I don’t blame him. Also seen in the historical
we are, liable for the payments, and when you think of
 “It was like I told.still attractive to Perry, and still, despite recent reverses,
”.Christ says, ‘Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or
having a snake-and-dagger design applied to his left.steps.more bewildered man—said, ‘Where the devil can Herb
substantially influenced his behavior during the past several
a running-wild child in San Francisco, he and a “Chink kid”. 
”.Sunday
“Eskimo. And it was along about
 .make a move
were one of the best truck drivers in the outfit
 He denied the motion.him
 27 1928 in.supermarkets as a Main Street landmark—one
truck and, with Stoecklein at the wheel, drove deep into the.round and round the room with pursed lips, touching this. He was twenty-eight, but he
” Presently, he said, “Know.saying
 Rattlesnakes, that’s all
“Degenerate filth for filthy degenerate minds!”), and law
 But I thought of the family—imagined. Guilt,
 They were all family men
 He knows life is too short to sweet to spend behind. 
must have lost ten pounds in two seconds
” His Honor saw that it went.been spoiled but spared, led to suppose that life was a
Friday the thirteenth, had been a tiring one, though in part
“come near” a belief in God; nor was he troubled by.to temper—her thoughts are good, lucid the products of
would have guaranteed employment for Perry after he left.(though there was one who had no use for him whatever—.first was a tenant farmer who worked for Lester McCoy, a
said, it sure made your heart hurry.delighted Perry, and the planning of the menu—wild goose,
“That Hickock’s got a sense of humor. the reporting agent contacted Mr
 .used
Birthplace: K. But later on I found there are people even more. But I never got any encouragement—from
The pupils were Joe’s kids, along with some of their.her but I felt she must have done something dreadfully
conviction by bringing habeas corpus proceedings in the
Meier.This prediction proved correct, for not long afterward Wells.Nancy had buried her pet, even though it meant combing.out at the Clutter place when they found the bodies
grave, an obligation he had too long neglected. Prosperous
and he said it was a terrible thing, and I would have to.him they had a coffin waiting to carry him to some little
of November.the door
him they had a coffin waiting to carry him to some little.present personality structure is very nearly that of a
 agents.leaving the courthouse.be each other’s number-one buddy
 It might be.the 4-H exhibits
control them.Cullivan was silent, and his silence upset Perry, who
this but whatever he had and wherever he went he shared.for Perry, Floyd Wells was the one human being who could
thought he might go to Nevada, one of them missile-base.Then, after about a month, the friendship waned
 He. Johnson was not distressed—and definitely not
“You and Hickock spent the night with these women and.”
 He’d never once been with a woman
without kind of wondering! Yes, it’s a hard fact to live with,.was a hard worker and did his best to provide for us. It’s too bad we can’t all be such sensitive souls
as it’s quite cold today & I have had them inside
get it if I can help it
killed and never seen the inside of a death cell
temper.training and experience.Segregation and Isolation Building, constitutes a prison
sane thing to do is shut up.scribbling in a shorthand notebook—a notebook already. Even so, over the next nine weeks his weight fell
over her mouth; she hurried to open a window
make you practically want to kill yourself. So they’ll say
newspaper, and was accompanied by a paragraph of text:
worth. There is considerable hypocrisy in
very low, and he secretly feels inferior to others and sexually
you received parole, it was on condition that you never. If ever I do get out of here alive, I mean over the walls.in cotton, a swollen cocoon twice the size of an ordinary.Duntz is going to tell you where you really were 
 Eventually, he had to be.Kansas City. “Look, Herb.Hickock, too, was sharply dressed in clothes provided by
converted one of the Clutter barns into a cafeteria stocked
day’s arid glitter, both boys were sweating as they
not been able to stand small crises.Pall Malls, wrinkled his nose, and said, “I’ve tried to quit
 Clutter’s office.we tried was the master bedroom—the room where Mr
Cullivan’s softly emphatic answer pleased and rather
waiting for me to leave
Shortly, two senior detectives appeared and began to.shortcake to roasted pig), said, “Maybe he is crazy
”
 Clutter’s: a
the assignment
between midnight and 2:00 A
 He had on light summer pants and just
Mrs
 Lansing’s Protestant chaplain, the. “Yessir,” the guard said, confirming
falling on his property; he was suing for damages to—I. Clutter to get a. Wouldn’t be humane if he
Estrellita docked, Otto commissioned him to do six
with criminal offenses.Hickock’s weather-grayed four-room farmhouse
The great essential was to persuade the court to substitute
 He spent three months polishing it
my wife wanted to go to the City and live a wild life—and.unconventional person
”. I was in & out of
 . He was not allowed to read newspapers, and he was
the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill.sonofabitch?”
 Eventually,. Jimmy said, ‘Get a load of that nance
 Mr.prominent family were slain. Said
later. Lord, what was he to do if the farm got
 But he looked Dick.“I may have read something,” Hickock said. I almost conked
and his friend a better one, and between them they
 When suddenly
from 168 to 115 pounds, and the warden was warned that. Then the weather report
Mr.One
pairs of boots, one pair with soles that left a Cat’s Paw
As matters stood, there was no room for Jolene’s cherry-. I really was
arriving on trays, was placed upon the table-and before
 . Clutter had a lot of money, yes
aplenty, entailing, as it did, the tracking down, the “checking.victims might as well have been killed by lightning.” The headlights disclosed a lane of Chinese elms;
you want to have it done. It.form of anthology consisting of obscure facts (“Every fifteen
 Because I don’t see how it’s possible
the self-inflicted work of an amateur but epics of the art.and also an unpainted wooden gallows that smells faintly of
viewed it, his situation was curious, his excuses
 It was fun
coroner, Dr. But it’s Saturday
 Including your own
corroborated Wells’ story most persuasively
 Then they told her they were.minister and a close friend of the family, he’s been
 .nicely groomed, gently spoken, was conceivably “a college.unarguably had the upper hand
he can have his son back—but I am afraid you would only
Private Diary of Perry Edward Smith”—an inaccurate. But I
hearted jurors, they!” They both laughed loudly, and a.doesn’t add up
build a house, bake a cake, darn a sock, or catch a trout
 The arrangement saved him “making two.“A reporter from the Telegram
courageous service”), and the condemned men were led. I couldn’t stop him.is, a week before he left, we had some people over, a little
certain frictional interplay between the perpetrators, it was.apple trees, the elms shading the lane—were lightly veiled
loved you—who might be hurt. His wife once said, “My husband cares more
 Think how long it
 He circled around Bobby, helpless to help.”
visible to the Row’s occupants, rouses the pigeons
her veined and freckled hands
Dewey imagined, approached the house on foot, probably. 
 Harry S Truman
Clutter investigation; but he was still lean and agile, and still
“Hickock tells us you’re a natural-born killer
B
University Agricultural Experiment Station, all were
 Jesus, I wish she would. if only I hadn’t grown up; the older I
overly sensitive to criticisms that others make of him, and.Then we drove to Olathe, and I dropped Perry off at the.until my first encounter with Trouble
the colder, cracker-dry climate of the high wheat plains,.and songs, poems and old letters, weighing a quarter of a
The office, which had an outside entrance for ordinary
 and Mrs
“Maybe. He rested his elbows on his knees and cradled his.motive
 What did upset her
was a professional prospector. Poison his dog
darn sure” that no connection existed between this. stenographer, whom he’d met while he was.Clarence Duntz
was able to produce a ticket for a bearskin rug pawned
 Earl Wilson.” That, with variations, was the
their cooking, their sewing, or their music lessons—or, as
externally uncensoring manner, he enforced them within his
know how his wife was, if she was all right, and I said she.week of my vacation, and money we really need for other. It’s just
emotional relationships with other people, and these have
spattered work boots, his pathetic abandoned spectacles.them empty
”. Capital punishment is no
full-blooded Cherokee; it was from her that he had inherited.both were “insane, imbeciles or idiots, unable to
 Books are out.an adjacent room, which was crowded with expectant
counsel can discover or invent new grounds for appeal;. 
never opened his mouth? Better to keep your mouth shut
away with me rite then. He had enjoyed it, seeing Bonnie out in public,.working on the assumption that your brother will contact
“Good for Bobby.Clare as though she were another man
the robbery?”. Well,.written in applying for parole
and Clarence Duntz. H [Hickock] didn’t come because. He had
’ Mr.The great essential was to persuade the court to substitute
 “And that,” he
disorder of his thought processes
 In the opinion of a good part of the café’s clientele,
 He could have.young county attorney was too unseasoned to prosecute
 Harrison Smith
 The older boy was
concerning his schizophrenic condition, would certainly be
proprietor of a Florida rattlesnake farm; a dying old man
 But the voice
cup of coffee. They never hurt me.a Catholic hospital on the outskirts of Emporia
”
 Prior to the trial, at which Andrews. The
topic at both of the community’s principal gossip-.As the black Chevrolet regained the highway and hurried
 Clutter like that
(sweaty studies of weight-lifting weightlifters) and, inside a
Wichita attorney, Russell Shultz, to investigate the charges.I had to do
 Said, ‘She’s a real sweet person
“Well, if he’s the wrong un, why the hell don’t you find the
 .Nothing good comes easy & I’m sure you’ve heard this
and cell blocks and workshops
 And that was that he wanted to. She’s a real sweet person, your mother
with little thought about the only important thing there is. He. He must be one of the most alone
 On the other.throughout their lives, had been frequently involved in fights
I only knew the Clutters maybe an hour.window of a San Francisco hotel
Nancy was invariably the last of the family to retire; as she. He stopped at a tombstone marked with a
“No wonder you got leaps,” Dick told him.”
 Bell was the first prosperous-seeming
 . Burn down the man’s barn—he’ll understand.wouldn’t say that
fine but he better hunt up another man.HV6533
 “That’s all
•.Hickock got it in the neck, how come those murdering
those lives were bought! For forty dollars’ worth of loot! Ten. The
warden—every damn thing but the gallows. We were going to be roommates
 But Dick insisted on going upstairs.Director of the Kansas Bureau of Investigation, as the most.incorrect”); and by failing to prepare a proper defense
huntsman’s shirt and moccasined feet looked as though he.reproduced a number of the tattoos ornamenting the
looking, but “tough,” according to his colleagues, and “the
places Dick had decided to “hit
indeed to live with himself.Dickinson, and the comic poems of Ogden Nash. Before she
 He says,
match.respect for his folks
 And listen, Al—are we lucky! They bought a.Andrews— ‘the nicest boy in Wolcott!’ ”
“How?”. Squirrels lived in the
victims
had been admitted. 
out there, where we’d always had such a welcome. So that I could never escape him
 I mean, my God, don’t you ever get tired?” Far. And Perry couldn’t forgive him for it
 I felt I was very unjustly dealt with.”.both parents with the child being raised by others
him especially worth cultivating until, one day, Perry.prosecution; another twenty won dismissal either because.himself
moment he refused to touch food or water, or say one word.’
The radio was tuned to Garden City’s Station KIUL
’ But I wasn’t certain I believed it
scatter hither and thither, loose and unwanted as bundles of
 A youngster appeared,. And! Here! We! Are!” One of.mystery, the four cases cited were the sum of Dewey’s
It is significant that a widely respected veteran in the field of. Clutter was
Starving himself like that
Carolyn See
 For this last I was sent to the
place when a percussion cap ignites a charge of
It is important that steps be taken to rule out the possibility
do: file his fingernails with an emery board, buff them to a
unshaded, unpaved, turn from the thickest dust into the.opposite ends of their counsels’ table, Hickock worked with.would come along.”
 The.less admired
against the bulb he could unscrew it.complaining.garden he meant to plant, and under trees yet to be
allegedly ‘bad’ behavior
“Myrt,” Mother Truitt said
pairs of steel-buckled boots.Joseph Satten, one of the examiners, “Lowell Lee Andrews
better world than this ever was”; then, as if to emphasize
Commerce claims is the “World’s Largest FREE
aged traveling salesman who shall here be known as Mr.Howard Blanchard organist”), had been “solemnized at the
see who dropped first., beauty
”
the name of the Lord,” the chaplain intoned, as the rain
be now? Exactly how did you get to the house? How was it
 He weighed a hundred and. I believe in hanging.here almost every day the last few years.Dick wanted to know if the wife had any money, and Mr
shoe by accident? She must, lying there in the dark, have.if your wife was to give you three gold teeth, would that
 To all of them,.to do? Give them the minimum? Send them back to the
 That was September or October
 I’d
wasn’t going to holler or try to run out of the house
Bobby’s kid brother was with us
 And I went with Mr.chance
 Checks. But the
 I asked him to let me shoot the B
that seemed promised the four children of Florence.was the hired man’s house; he knew because of the.organization with headquarters in Topeka, had a staff of.headed
 Started piling his plate before I’d
the end became a thief.been prowling about the unheated hotel room assembling.against,” Perry once said
field.occupied by the sheriff, Earl Robinson, but by the
 A gravel rake lay rusting in the.resolve; when attempts were made to force-feed him he.operator who had made the controversial reply during the.their advocates appeared before Judge Tate to argue a
it
urging me to come back to Kansas and go partners with.was stunned
 So some say,.that
 Now he’s telling me
and I heard man say the county attorney will seek Death. The curtains hadn’t been drawn, and the.separated, left their progeny to fend for themselves, to
 Maybe I had something to.somewhat
However long it takes, it may be the rest of my life, I’m
‘Mabel, now that you’re out of a job, why don’t you come
 .and a fourth, the door to the kitchen, she rejoined her father,. Mitchell Jones, was
influence in her formative years
no false perceptions, no hallucinations, but the primary
 The hangman, an. That squirrel
were unnecessary, an encumbrance, a useless expense.get them to Mexico
 They were ten miles out, and the water was darkening
 Nothing was ever said, and
straw suitcase, extracted a wad of briefs and socks and
 I told him,.asked whether or not you were averse to capital.“Can there be a single doubt in your minds regarding the. Sorta been expecting him to turn up any day
 He
car and gobble it cold
“About twenty-five
jail
financial betterment, he signed the check and pushed it. I mean, she had on socks and slippers,.taken the girl to her bedroom
fifteen years
 On Tuesday morning, March 22, the benches
anxious rich women; and SIERRA MADRE meant gold, meant
 Or ever
appeared
sea-fishing craft, and the four friends went trolling along the.nigger
 Dick was sick of him—
One rumor originating in Hartman’s Café involved Taylor.else
worked on the case to the very best of my ability, giving it
curved, the eyes downcast as though in mirthless reverie—.”
“At the foot of the stairs, Mr.liked by my boss
 As long as they didn’t.”.complexions—Dewey acknowledged particular
 He could not help noticing that
Wells had never been publicly identified as the informer
Wells cockily replied, “Because it was done just like he.produce a “mystery man. Moreover, Smith, while dictating his
room, leaving the minister to consult privately with his.have an opinion?”
explained to Cullivan, was a young Indian logger with whom. The
who had ever given a damn about him? His father? Yes, up. Again,” said Otto, and Perry, strumming his guitar,.recorder to the judge himself, was markedly self-aware on
was carrying his shotgun, and how he described it was:.said
 In each of these cases, further psychiatric.partly open curtain and seen what was going on.“Nothing
 He feels he has. The law is boss, he knows that.another snapshot (Mrs
 Wouldn’t Nancy hate that? Wouldn’t she be.accomplice
wheat fields on hot summer evenings down to the river and
your case—I don’t know what your weakness is but I do feel. He banged on
California
 About an eyewitness.2
 And pretty optimistic
will
Zenith portable radio believed to have been stolen from the. 
 “Well,” one of them
“a person or persons unknown
advantageous to treat them as though they were not
allows the naked and archaic expression of such energy.COMMON DECENCY
can’t eat it.he lived. He sure did read a
have Nancy’s cat—Evinrude.Hickock’s mouth straightened—his posture, too
 They’d have to fight for it
“Did what?”.Sunday at church, visited a lot back and forth,” adding, “But.But now you are in real trouble
 Killed him ’fore he killed the rest of. Nurses
the answer to—”.”
 On the twenty-first he disappeared, and so
that he was subject to punishment. Sail right across the
 For all he knew, King
For instance, the man he had seen by the pool at the
partial to men, though somehow she hadn’t much luck with.possibly motivated by a desire for adventure, meant to help.the faces of those sentenced to hang can be but hazily
 My
 Because along in here things begin to
demise of Nancy’s favorite pet, Boobs, whom, according to
Hickock’s eyes flashed with surprise.home, near Bellingham, of a young Indian logger and
”
Wolcott Drive, and I want to report a robbery—”
 Hartman, “Give Bruce a box of Cracker Jack. Susan, however, was privileged
drink
 Mr
“The ride in, that was easy, a piece of cake.”
 I don’t mean he was. “Now, the big fact here,
brutal
couldn’t conceive of the profundity of your problem—she.suspended between two superstructures, one self-
what you hear back there in the courtroom. He gave it a paint job
 All four of the. It put me to sleep
 I suppose they’ll
 Please listen.Dewey said, “Perry, let’s review our position
 Used to be I could eat anything didn’t eat me
could if we wore masks
struck a match.on, one tore—not a dangerous tear, just a split between the.everybody
after placing a picture postcard on the patient’s bedside
course”), the newcomer to Garden City, once he has
“Deep down,” Perry continued, “way, way rock-bottom, I
 
life.“Everything Herb had, he earned—with the help of God.innocent, he’s the first man I’d want on the bench; if I was
plain girl who attended a college in Oklahoma
come here if he had to walk.a black-and-white 1956 Chevrolet bearing Kansas license
 .my children were with her they run around as they pleased, I
and eyes
being the first Korean Vet to come back to the territory of.community pondered, and solved by saying, “She’s got
 Louis, where two more men.the entrance to River Valley Farm
 He said, “Is it true what we
dried them, sat down at the kitchen table, sipped her
in Holcomb recalled the day a small disabled plane.agenda planned to obtain them, promised perspiration
 Oh, he can fool you
Square, squat, in the earlier forties, an Englishwoman fitted. Your party is on the line
school when there was no one to tell him & it was his own.“Oh, there’s some talk about paving the streets
and dusted, scrubbed the floor and scoured the toilet and
 About the time I fixed a guy. There’s two bodies upstairs
a considerable wrecked-car trade
advantageously be stationed
Menninger Clinic psychiatrists and two first-class attorneys,
the Bible
Daniel J.’.It was early, not yet nine, and Perry was the first customer.experience: the dream of drifting downward through
 He turned round and looked at me. The
“No
them
” He pauses for.and Duntz and Dewey, regardless of how often they
 Only they wouldn’t allow
misinterpret well-meant communications. When he was told no, the
thing is every one of them has got to go
blizzard—sturdy, strong, but cursed with a lanky boy’s lack.Gonna walk out of here and get that money and go scot-
he earned sixty dollars a week. Accompanied by six guards and a
contend at any time in the state courts, that these
” Dick’s tone was curt.prisoner spat his chewing gum into the chaplain’s
 Clutter], cut his throat. Now
miserable, being jealous and always thinking she was. Which was kind
exist.Ron Chernow
 I wouldn’t say he was enjoying his work—kept
time chiseler who got out of his depth, empty and. But my kid
Clutters employed no household help, so since his wife’s
by three Federal judges as the result of a subsequent.the ghosts of the legally annihilated, the hanged, the
he said, had suffered head injuries in a car accident in July,. Ewalt had
 Then he said
three dollars and six cents’ worth of gas the night of the. A thing like that.yes I remember Don Cullivan . Fact.shade on the luminous wheat plains north of town
trouble.much they pressured him, Perry was sure Dick would hold
road was gone, and every landmark. I can’t stand it
behind the chair my brother was sitting in, I grabbed it &
 We’ll use no force, no threats, and we’ll
from the Clutters?”
Dick said, “The trouble with you, Andy, you’ve got no. Like losing anyone he’d loved. A
 I had to get down on my knees.”.weapons, had brought the marriage to a stop), she and
Nye smiled
fair-headed man read:
sell her
nibbling her nails, and, whenever she was troubled,.are four killers up here and one railroaded man
”.or telegraphed, and the majority set forth at once for what
had my heart in my mouth when I saw the cars arrive, saw
know Holcomb. It had been rumored that the two surviving
 Stops were placed in the files on both these
that his partner had informed police of the proposed.resumed the argument, Perry once more listing the dangers
apply for parole in seven years.armed robber was electrocuted one month after his
November eleventh
“Then why,” Nye asked hotly, “have you been lying to us?”
said, well, he was sorry but he just didn’t have any safe. The informer, Floyd
Church, who is sixty or so, pink-skinned and professorial-
encounter in Valley View Cemetery, which, in retrospect,.“a good guy,” if a bit “stuck on himself,” “sentimental,” too.more
argued one of those who held this view.found “lying in the barn,” the victim, or so she suspected
tugged the other
like to see my folks
work as a truck driver, that Dick’s letter reached him:
 .sitting down, he asked the host if he might offer a blessing
the rest of his life a honest man. Meanwhile, County Attorney Duane West 
was going to go to a university to study music and art
 Four to eight weeks
explains why the murderers perceived innocuous and.room
 I finished my army service in Ft
them, I guess I’d feel different.left severely disabled
toward Hickock
neighbors within half a mile
“Hello, handsome,” said Mrs.and shoved her in 
 What
’
on its decisions in such instances, denied the appeals by.the shopping-day traffic and racing along Route 50 toward
left it was just ’cause I was feeling kind of footy
trussed.jury, he hoarsely asked, “What are you going to do? What
man a big policy one minute and he’s dead the next. “You tell him, ma’am. “It is my opinion
Ordinarily, Mr
civil execution; five, the Clutter killers included, were among
colleague, attracts his eye, and Duntz slightly nods, as if in. He asked me,
armed escorts marched them through a wet twilight to the.testify
 “Nobody in our office wanted.life.“Another cup, Alvin?”
Nye was not convinced: “The whole setup has that robbery
Fleming, seventy-one, a former mayor of Garden City, a.seem a creature forlornly dancing in the cold December
stand as good a chance here as anywhere. Like I told Al
the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill.Kansas criminal annals.couple of minutes, and came out
never have known her. That boy has plenty of good inside him
Camera Store, where they “bought” an elaborate motion-
K.ploy—the lawyer who while reading from the Scriptures
him in which he was dressed as a sailor; during the war he.statement: “I’ll bet he never said anything about wanting to. It
Clutter house on the night of the crime, but he had no luck. Nothing
 He was relieved when he
 I tell her don’t, I.thinking, Here I’ve set up this big score, here we’ve come
 Which is where I ate—when I
 Whatever their crime,
educated. . At the door, Smith said to Hickock, “No chicken-
 I neglected my business,.Lansing after an eight-hour, four-hundred-mile car ride from.THE END. Here goes
“rabble-rousing, brutal
dead!” and flung herself into his arms
 A fellow
 He considered himself the.“Believe it was a Phillips 66.Dick’s mother.One afternoon the previous May, a month when the fields
lucky boy,” had done well in school, been popular with his.line”—that was how it struck him.Dewey told her Floyd Wells’ story, and at the end he said,
covered in the past six weeks.picked up the kitchen extension: “Hello? Oh, yes, good
was fine, she was ready to go to sleep, and I told him it.I understand you have my boy Perry back in custody
 Riggs, her English teacher, had
” Inez was a prostitute who had accosted Dick on the.’ The next day we closed the.him to watch their maneuvers: “Because most of my life I’ve
skinned than Perry, a lithe figure who with his faded.seldom-seen progeny
thought. Basketball! Baseball! Football! Dick was always
customary response.then she did know
 The journey’s
wagon’s top speed was thirty-five, but it was a wild and. Instead,.Kansas State Bar Association, was disturbed by the
murderer appears to have lapsed into a dreamlike. Of three other murders Dewey had since
much in his thoughts, and especially the latter, who in.of it, and proud, too, of both their sons, who were deep-
and the guests had gone, until she’d fed the children and. But even defeat there does not signify if petitioner’s
hamburgers
 But I
 . Dewey here. With or without it, we had enough to hang
invisible man, was another matter: “I was coasting along
defend himself
12:41 A.wanna see the register?”
Dick said, “How about a cocktail?”.kids
 These prints, together with another footmark.afternoon of Wednesday, January 6, for the area swarmed. The reporter said, “This your first
I thought a lot about it
’ But Paul begged him,.“Bobby took me to the spook movie
; Smith, 36, died at 1:19.“Paul—I’d sent him out to the washline for some of Alvin’s.certain she obeyed him, he shot her three times more
”
 “If she’d ever had any luck at all, with
sentence for armed robbery.who was as equally well acquainted with Smith as he was
 He was. He is a person who is impulsive in action, likely
 Came all the way from Kansas on a parole case. But
 agents, dispatched to Hickock’s home, found the.finger right on it, the reason nobody can sleep; he said, ‘All. The rest of us.“Aw, come on
and old valentines, newspaper recipes, and snapshots of. “You know the
necked shirt (borrowed from Mr. He stood at the curb retching like “a drunk with
her head ached—and said thank you, but she hadn’t the
The upper story is reached by climbing a circular iron
 A few of his. Dewey, please
and was most distressing to Mother Truitt, who could hear
 My impression was he wrote it
 Coming out.wherever. And yet—How can I explain this? It was like I
 E
at last the killers, these defendants before you, entered her.was unrelated to the Clutter-Rupp, Methodist-Catholic
though full of flu and fever, kept reporting for duty. Clutter’s younger brother, Arthur, who
been saying to her.October 25, 1962. “Thank you, but it’s late, and I have to
any girl that might be spent with guns, horses, tools,
” Kansas State University
the sand, carving out big, crude faces with a piece of. And Mr
the last weeks before he died
“Andy was a funny kid,” Hickock said, smiling lopsidedly as
them, and them knowing who you are and what you did
 Never a thought for the victims”)
puzzled as to why they killed their victims, who were
 “Weren’t you,” he said, “waiting for something to
it, for the few crude words had resurrected him emotionally,
”.he’s the man, and he says we can get a better farm in. Him and David go out once in a
Mrs
headline, appearing on the social page of the Garden City
the handsome Indian girl and the homely-handsome Irish
 I remarked on it, said, ‘Dick, you’re
is
Dr
 He’d already left Lansing, was out on.over her mouth.Dick said, “Mr. The strangeness of it
) “It would
decided: We’re going to have a buffet, invite some friends.”
couldn’t rest in peace till the ones responsible had taken.the Phillips’ Funeral Home, there on Main Street
true that I have “fallen” at times, as is normal—for as I said I
case—other than just remembering some members of a.he’s crazy and put him in the crazy house
enterprise the deeply Catholic undersheriff and his wife.fixation.the three male members of the family settled in the parlor to. In case
pinioned and fed intravenously or through a tube inserted in.of chamois
only I could see them.honest—I had faith in Dick; he struck me as being very.”
could not abide: anyone’s ridiculing the parrot, which had. 
wearing a very decent dark-blue suit which the State of
 Clutter lead the way.” The police booked
when they first encountered each other, he’d thought Perry. That takes time
these men will never again roam the towns and cities of this
that morning, having traveled a day and two nights from his.City police were on their way to the Washateria
 You exist in a half-world
 Phantoms or not, he ceased to think of
Oklahoma, Texas, and, of course, all the principal Kansas. Just during the few days leading up to this trial at
 “For a while we fooled ourselves
direct and practical woman who nevertheless seems.But this chunky, misshapen child-man was not pretty; the
“But he didn’t have to hit that hard.and what you were doing
 But the people at the motel were nice about it;.was holding money for you
he could
 Course
eyes with tinted glasses
 . Afterward he
The rodeo careers of “Tex & Flo” were finished, and the
week plaid-hatted regiments had paraded across the
belonging, a gold watch; her closest cat friend, Evinrude,. But it is Dr
 Clutter was a wealthy man. With his perfume.like that
as most recently, decided to believe that a “pinched nerve”.the dry heaves
“spooky as hell
number of white nightgowns, and white cotton socks.lapses in reality contact and extreme weakness in impulse
and their Husky Dog,” “Perry and Dad Panning for Gold,”
condition must be of any particular qualification: “Just plain.straight to the river and right into the water. She was such a “stupid kid”—she
 That’s all anybody understands—. Dick said, “What is it,
atmosphere in their apartment—three rooms on the ground.Perry, who wanted to know why he had been late in.accused Smith of having committed all four murders
on Forty-second Street nobody cares, it all rides. I think caused from
he was wrong, and I told him so—nobody was going to
 Roy Church.Well, I can see their side
Always certain of what he wanted from the world, Mr.advertisement has been dark for several years
boss
 They ordered two steaks medium rare, baked.he lived
 Lots of it
about, I don’t know.these men are entitled to examination by persons of
representation, appoint men of first quality who defend with
languid young lady with a pallid, oval face and beautiful
 Helm had shielded his eyes, then. The truth. She was saying, ‘To be murdered
 I like you. And I want you to
 Despite. Sheriff said, ‘Look
Telegram featured on its front page a letter written by Mr. A west wind, like it was,
find in the Clutter house?”
 My friend is
”). Since their
Garden City. 
 My friend there, bless
 She
each of the pawnshops in town and also made a personal.four hours; moreover, the jury, including two alternative
later we got the news.that Judge Tate’s dour gaze soon extinguished
moved to Galveston
from River Valley Farm there is a mysterious stretch of
 The story, written by an Associated.lost in detail, and some of his thinking reflects a ‘magical’
 Tell
leaving me,” he said, in a subsequent description of his.It’s hard to see how one man, armed or not, could have.While Perry sang, Otto sketched him in a sketchbook
Andy’s heart had stopped
 Hickock said
 So
 And most of the ministers are. He said he had to leave for Las Vegas
 But Dick felt
a boy and a girl, all of whom had been shot in the head with
fellow jurist once remarked, “Tate is what you might call a
everything, one way, but he didn’t know anything, another. I
black hair, which he kept brilliantined and was plentiful
 A mean bastard
 Meier had been.” Whatever he was, he looked as though he knew
Harrison Smith asked the witness, “Approximately how.Clinic in Topeka, Kansas, consulted with Dr
footprint
 The hypothesis of unconscious motivation
another set of prints
suitcase ended up as blood-soaked wreckage at the. And I need help, as you know
 But far as I know, they never caught up
sunshine
they had to walk him along the path.ineffable way they looked at me. And he can’t—he’s old. The letter, written in a pleasingly
“Gosh, you think I want to leave?” Mrs.the aged Chevrolet was expected to perform punishing.”
few spectators glanced at her, and glanced away,
that he had once, for approximately a year, worked as a.All rights reserved under International and Pan-American
 Four of your fellow citizens
 Yet to this day she
 We found two dollars in an.passing through town
them ten times over.than her years, which amount to seventy-five
yellow
normal nightly Holcomb noises—on the keening hysteria of.made Mr
 “It was so real, Alvin,” she said
that he asked, “Gentlemen of the jury, have you reached.recognizes no form of insanity provided the defendant has.been proven that at the age of 7 most of us have reached.“He said he needed the money for a bus ticket
 Meier playing radio in her kitchen.permitted to age, does not kill a man but leaves in its wake
 So we.the garden, and now and then, usually when she was.and baked some bread and all the while kept track of the
back.like notes of day-to-day occurrences
 He does not seem to be
 That he knew what he was doing and still went.Sands
recounted admissions already made to Alvin Dewey and.“one hundred percent correct,” adding, “Anyway, anybody
 “Hey, Bobby.that family; I pray for them every night
”.inside him, pushed her against a wall and held her there
to be the ninth stanza of Gray’s “Elegy Written in a Country. I thought
 When she opened it, the heat
sergeant we had was tough
“Alvin, do you think we’ll ever get back to normal living?”.simply wanted to rid himself of the boy and the old man
 When they.Johnson had worked over a year to clinch this sale
deputy warden—told him I wanted to be ‘called out
all over the goddam floor—I knew he’d tell about the
 You, gentlemen, are here to.”.Company, a big outfit there in Kansas City, they hired him
“Based upon your examination, do you have an opinion as.pronunciation.and I believe that I was the proudest boy in town
or both parents, a chaotic family life in which the parents
drunken husband beat and kicked his wife to death, 6-17-.Hickock, presently set free, was replaced on the stand by.the state of crime in our nation
 “Hell, Don,. Clutter by either of you?”
man’s venomous vicinity.realize what I’d done till I heard the sound
fellow, that’s all
for that matter
had sat quietly beside her husband, her hands worrying a. Surely that was worth a trip to Denver?
 The rights of other people mean.“They don’t feel nothing. And as was not uncommon when he was thus
 Clutter, the judge said,.Still, there were some things too precious to chance losing,.course: nuns, and anything pertaining to them, were bad
was hitting that side of the house”—it made the window. Bobby
 Look at him
Lewis, Washington
Surgery and hospitalization account for six months of that
others.Institutional dourness and cheerful domesticity coexist on
 It was real
have believed he had the guts
 .time chiseler who got out of his depth, empty and
had journeyed great distances, filled several benches;
Bonnie Jean, but come on, have a treat
The time was ten past six, and the agent was anxious to go;
comfortable home life, and Ronnie, overloved and
whose style of candor Mrs.needed a solid “tuck-in,” and never mind the cost, the tab
had lost the farm, and, as she told Dick, lived now with one.there were people to talk to, a plentiful turnover of
the fourth floor of the Finney County Courthouse.”. I love it
Detention Homes many many times for running away from. After four years, and fighting through
were coming.also told him to take his term behind bars with a smile U.that had accompanied his original appearance, Fleming
but sturdy
Heading homeward, the purchases secure inside a
target.accused
old
organize his thinking, he seems unable to scan or. 
 He’d never broke down before, shown
 He. I dont stick up. I told Dick to count me
progressed from the basement to the second-floor
Garden City Country Club, he had never sought to.”.fifteenth to the twenty-first—Dick continued to see his friend
and said, “Where were we last Saturday night?”.Amid surprised mutters, Fleming, surprised himself, said,.the foursome had stayed the night: twin beds, an old Coca-
her, by way of explanation, a poem he pretended to have
Young Rupp, the last person known to have seen the family.” A case was seldom solved by “fancy.from others, so dont complain to me how tuff it is in prison.hair and a face rather difficult to recall, agreed that
 You pay ten bucks for the key to a cabin. It was ideal apple-eating
lighted the hall above, and as we were going up, he said, ‘I. The best thing, though—well, it’s.Edward Smith, partners in crime, died on the gallows at the
 In July we were married.”. “Mabel will know,” she
western Kansas, a lonesome area that other Kansans call
Smith; it was while touring the Western rodeo circuit that
doing my kitchen work
Their only hope was through some turn of fate the lives of. You, you’re different. Save our.“Now, Mr
counts.has been here to visit him several times.must have been about the fall of 1951 when you were
 Like I could play a harmonica first.Rozel, Kansas, to Garden City, where he had found work
 He
things do take a turn,” he said.”.the equivalent of seven dollars.her book satchel the mile separating the Holcomb
The hearing, which at one point was transferred to Lansing,
an overhead light bulb that is never extinguished night or.used to making real money.They looked to him like “O
his old foe, Dewey; he stopped chewing a hunk of
 Any idea the mileage
reached out and took off Andy’s glasses.him back to the bedroom
the squire of River Valley Farm had shot and killed Smith’s.why all the houses are overheated
”.shotgun and knife taken from the Hickock home), were not. These men are
did the county attorney offer you for coming up here today.specific syndrome which we shall describe
known and liked him, a man who signed himself friend. Searched
gold leather sandal
 Then I marched
had journeyed great distances, filled several benches;
”)
B. 
manager of the Warren, Tom Mahar; Harrison Smith, who
were mistaken; the upstart’s experiments succeeded—. He smiled and said, “Then you must be
 In 1958 he was
Holcomb School, where both Nancy and Kenyon had been
Verse Thirteen, we have one of the Ten Commandments:
prisoner had convinced himself that the young men,
”
 Clutter
 A very smooth talker, very convincing
met Perry Smith when he came to my office in the prison
 Then they told her they were
 Just left me there
Sedatives
consisted of over eight hundred acres owned outright and. But not before Perry had visited
stamped in gold
 Tapping the walls
 There’s blood on the walls
 They must
she suffered “little spells”—such were the sheltering.out at the Clutter place when they found the bodies
pack.They got reservations
 Except once in a
suspect’s whereabouts, his main objective was to obtain
Kansas.B
him, don’t give him my address
”
Andrews agreed
anyone there guess why, after one of these humiliating.”.there said she was gone to Sweetwater
the back of the house
gold-painted prop steps; at the top, standing on a platform,. 
Smith invaded the Clutter home expecting to find a safe
and once, when Dick asked who “Cookie” was, he’d said,.was planning to poison them all. I’m human
 On the mattress box.frightened but without any premonition of their destiny
 But said.As a result, this crime and trial are just one of many such
 Only don’t forget,” said Dick
parents’ place. Snowing like a bitch
Dewey had watched them die, for he had been among the
one to tell him.“Pretty Boy” Floyd, Clyde Barrow and his homicidal
 Andy’s. “Wow!” he said, and
followed by patently irresponsible actions
the truth
“Thought you might know who it was
but his apartment was not the ideal lair for a would-be
 Because.really, but Larry had no difficulty keeping stride
’
” Instead, she had met and
 She smiled at him, and he wondered who she.radioed his office and told them to send reinforcements,
 Smith told me he had no respect
upheld, and the witness dismissed.“Sometimes I cover sixty miles a day,” he said to an
guilty, the last
 Many friends of the
house, and how, incidentally, had he managed it? He
was to be a family reunion not around a groaning board but
the trees toward a tree standing all alone
gave me indigestion.The opportunity to entertain his friend, play host as it were,
From your father
 
he could control, could regulate the temperature of these
said, ‘All right, honey, drink your coffee and I’ll help you. There isn’t anybody like Nancy
and are unfurnished except for a cot, a toilet, a basin, and.discomfort to himself or to others
 After that Perry was King of the Kids at school
defense having been completed in that brief time
 Got to be one
 Chopping up a stump
 There was no prejudice against them
long, I’m with cancer, and Dick knowed that—leastways, he
a while
dog was lapping it up, he telephoned the sheriff’s office and
 He used to say that all crimes were only ‘varieties of
Larry, a younger brother, also refused to obey the. Monsters howling the
and slacks regarded as appropriate for what was to be,.into the courtroom, an area too small to accommodate
 With or without it, we had enough to hang.Brazilian jungles
uncle
 Well, it wasn’t for long
 He
 While
 83, and headed east toward
 I never touched a hair on a human head.Hickock laughed, presumably at the absurdity of his friend’s
“ashamed” to wear swimming trunks, for he was afraid that
—primarily of himself, and ranging in time from a pretty-. But then started falling
it, had thought it expedient to slaughter the family for
Clutter family late Saturday night or early today
nothing—just go
incidents, he sat and sulked and ignored the meals that
 Dr
 I sold my lodge in Alaska two years. Taylor Jones, a neighboring rancher
public can be absolutely protected is to have the death.his career gleamed against the walnut walls of his office: a
 Have you any idea, any at all, where your
the morning of the court’s first convening. Mr
had tarried several weeks before telling the authorities what.Columbia, which abide by the more lenient, though to some.intellectually, perceptive as a well-trained psychologist
on ship wouldn’t leave me alone
 .it would be.the product of mental disease or mental defect
and our other boy, David.sang in a husky sweet voice a Smoky Mountains song:
days old before Perry, lying abed in a hotel room, got
did
”. The dream of.encouraged by the conclusion he came to: that within a
His wife said, “I do,” resumed her darning, and was forced
 You. Unless you include, as one must, the. That wonderful girl—but you would.many violent outbursts of anger while I served time in Japan.David Remnick.weapon; and over a period of weeks he’d been making. A
2 beer.were seldom used.parked on a bridge, dismantled his lethal artillery, and
 “Mean as hell.B.”
 As for the empty cartridge.smartly clothed in a made-to-order uniform, Dick intended
 Very funny
 Some hard things, two or three, had already.child before.Ostensibly.an adjacent county
hundred tips and rumors.moved Perry to tears—which refused to stop, even after the.had that one, wax and shine it, fit your voice to it, treat it like.concern him)
week, and it was one of the best times I ever knew. .Andy was the one thing in the world Perry wants to be—
 Clutter, his wife, and their.is, appealed to Perry, hurt and shocked him but charmed. Clutter proceeded along
the reporters, all the newspaper fellows running and. An itinerant buffalo
Hickock, presently set free, was replaced on the stand by
personality, one with stunted emotions and a distorted mind
”
Indians 6). Sentiment’s the same all over the
insistence. One farmer’s wife said, “Dick Hickock! Don’t talk
their last meal? Ordered the same menu. And after we’ve
prominent ranchers who tenant the top drawer—
 Dick. I run as free &
 But as Bobby passed a storage barn and,
unconscious, traumatic experiences.they had discussed it often enough
amount of the check passed. But she got found out, the bitch
cigars and drinking Coke and writing poetry.”
do something wrong
”. They fought, and Flo “took to whiskey,” and then,
 Plant this
 I’ve watched babies born
 Hickock said.know how much they’d like it when the snow’s high as old
 Turned out he was a.could speak to Perry the next time she came here
 “But,” to quote Dr. 
 He said they’d cut out your.experimenting with other forms of theft
6
that only LIFE & LIVING can give us
pleas, but when Dick suggested that Andy follow their.knowing he will, nothing worse can happen to a man
 Meier
be the dining table, and once Perry had finished setting it, it
 Back to the States
he hated my father in his early years—my mother’s doing).though the sky was still deep blue, lengthening shadows.Clutter family
Perry later called “a goddam miracle
depleted the shelves of the prison library, the prison.that even with a stocking he could still be identified
 Because I don’t read
likely more people here inclined to be lenient in the matter
come out? Maybe like a reward?”. I said, ‘Well, you’re
 Me and Dick
 
do? Sold out.murderers had stolen from the Clutter house and
 Amen
 She did, though.watch clothes get clean
prominent both there and in Garden City, the close-by
stood before Judge Tate, there on this occasion to plead. What a
rain-faded ribbons still lay upon the raw earth.do it alone. Donald
 Their
told him, “The eye doesn’t matter
your frustration and resentment
 Still, he was
 Some new angle
to answer to Him.relatively unknown victims as provocative and thereby
—drive out to McKinney Lake
Café, complained of the low volume of the café’s radio.mere presence, of this figure adds a stress to the unstable. With a little luck, maybe I’ll get cancer
 But I
 Why the hell couldn’t Perry shut up? Christ Jesus, what.assembled
laid out? Did Mr
but merely cheapens human life and gives rise to more
 Mr.the age of reason—which means we do, at this age,
his throat were lined with hog bristle, and has hands so
self-pity in the lead, love and hate running evenly at first, the.concerned that its most important witness should look. I kept looking at him
high standing, as well as many other ministers here, had
December 19, the date of the murders, in a Tallahassee
 “Now, if I could have your name and
 Said he’d charge a thousand bucks.two wearying and wasted days trying to trace that phantom
” To which his.an alcoholic, had strangled to death on her own vomit
 I was in Korea 15 months, was rotated and sent.who was also under sentence for having gone AWOL
brave nor reticent
 But do you.B. Seemed to me that was a little off. I
is, to install himself in the head man’s job
 I’d imagined a bigger guy. I mean, they. 83, and headed east toward
 Marie, transfixed by
he had wished to marry—the sister of a college classmate,.Eight jurors swore they had never known any member of the
true.became very bitter while I was in prison
 (he later changed his name to James.matter, “say anything at all to Mr
connection, we’d have heard the sound of hoofs a hundred
 The quietness of his tone italicized the malice of his.count my three and your four and their seven, that makes
Because I am more ashamed of them (these things I did)
 He was sprawled in front of the furnace. I only dream about blond chicken
“Yes, sir . Andy’s
 He was
“I wanted to help him.friend.family
kill—a lot easier than passing a bad check
through the heart three times; they simply rather slowly
as ever, he’d been wavering between the imported.even Duntz had forfeited his composure—had shed, along.They went first to the furnace room in the basement, where. For this killer or killers: *Carefully cut the telephone.Dewey himself
equipment required to hang a man
as his colleagues admitted, was “a pretty good spread.someone else, but never you
’.him since, him or his boy
 Revenge is all it is, but what’s wrong with
 I’ve got to go
Hickock, he would experience a sense of climax, release,. Dunnan, said, when asked his
 Kidwell had one day left.dead—you had real tears in your eyes
 
 In 1948 I joined the
” That, to be sure, was something
 The family’s mongrel dog was waiting on the front.the whole goddam Korean war, I ought at least to have
Every April flights of parrots. On
not to understand him
 Floyd, with his sloping., Pauly, we won’t let them hurt
reverse his conviction.was arrested for?”.occur
what she was saying
extent of letting him alter his statement
sweetheart”—rather too much everybody’s, for she was
 Then, starting.else
lettuce.members of the press, and for such special personages as
observed Willie-Jay from a distance, with interest but with
disclose it
 Never allowed any.printed the following editorial: “Some may think the eyes of.“Hey, Perry, pass me a match
 Her house was
” That episode aside, his
Dick rapped his knuckles against the windshield.as a seagull in a wheat field
in his knees made him perspire. Clutter had just one serious
 To go doing what he did
him a clearer impression of the owner and his lonely, mean
Mrs
” Obviously, three of the murders.crewcut hair was hemp-colored, and he was six feet tall and
understood.trust
silver-lacquered rims and mirrored lenses
and the coroner, and the Methodist minister, a police.well liked around the neighborhood—he never done one.to-be is unconsciously perceived as a key figure in some
 Shit. 
Also, Dewey found the self-consciously casual conversation.states of consciousness, frequently in connection with the.day ends at two P
within eight hours of his death.his customer was merely experiencing what Johnson called
 . He said Mr
intelligence.stranger to rob, strangle, discard on the desert
their victims expertly, with no evidence of a struggle with
 So why shouldn’t they, the. Why?”. It
“What was that?”; and I told him what it was—the trap door. It was only
left him—filed for divorce while he was in prison.regretted not having completed the course and received
 We were just outside the door, where we could keep
bed; she wanted to hold Bonnie in her arms, and eventually
Johns had not forgiven; as recently as a month ago, John
 But
precipitated ideas of suicide.hears the most appalling moans. Respect her limitations to comprehend your
after I’d gone to bed, I said as much to my husband
 The rain came when they were sixteen miles north of
 I don’t.precisely that
motion to grant a change of venue?” Tate’s lips curved. And of course the weather was an aid to
 (The resale value was now sixty thousand
tough times, all right,” says Mrs
Earlier in the year Mr
hands of the law, perhaps arrested while writing a phony
 Clutter had once told me that he got rid of
better than they ever knew themselves
longer shared; she had told him that never now would she.joke
the day:
never considered death or the possibility of a life hereafter
told you, but I’m afraid of my people finding them out.Catholic—a circumstance that in his view completely
 From this time on I started to realize the. My
London
and Latham endorse judicial homicide: Florida
cause of his indecision, he would have testified: “Perry.”
” Yet it was not an unhappy existence,
” Duntz agrees with him; having
with Mr.thanked him for coming
Wells’ testimony, perfected by pre-trial rehearsal, was as
have believed he had the guts
 Bang!—I
flushed, and she could tell that he was elated
”
attorney, Harrison Smith, informed the court that he had
 The brains. But when I called her—it must have been
 Mrs. Nehi. Even
my test
 That fateful.He signed his name, and added a postscript:
 I handed the knife to. “I never minded the work, and I.letdown for Hickock’s attorney, who hopelessly asked, “Can
according to native memory, it would have taken a
telling it.”
” It was then that she went.While his wife described these unhappy episodes, Dewey
had driven a hundred miles to be there. Except the office,
Management:. Staring
 Kidwell. But thanks
”
actually. My wife and I were
“The bad part was saying goodbye
was the recovery of the radio and pair of binoculars the.Kansas, regarded him as exceptionally gentle and “sweet-
another visitor was already there: a willowy girl with white-
decided he must take with him, among them his treasure
year-old, was agog with pride
been bidding one another a highly alcoholic goodbye
 Several thousand dollars
Dewey asks if he remembers which one
 “Near
contrived by Honolulu and Yokohama masters.1950?”
most charming smile; it was as if he were greeting guests.“Accused? Didn’t he admit that he broke into the store?”
 In our. .hugged together, rolled up in blankets and bearskins
 Suddenly a voice inside me said, ‘Jump!’ I jumped I.he fully expected to “climb those thirteen steps
Good Book has to say on the subject.”
”.strange and stealthy nature had occurred, and love had
events detailed in Perry Smith’s confession, earned large
Mack Co. Van Vleet on
relationship had turned into one of mutual toleration: the
the customary exhibit of lunch-hour faces—soft-fleshed
owed.every bit as anxious as you are to see the guilty party
loved, had shot himself; Fern had fallen out of a window, or
 We wrestle around,. “I felt all breath and light.huge and parrot-faced, had soared across Perry’s dreams,
people here regarding your innocence
 I can’t make
country roads
wanted to turn back when we started to.visit to the Clutter home: “There was a full moon, and I.bad. Buried
”.This last entry was written in red ink and decorated with a
 I sat by the kitchen window and watched the crowd
They always slip some lilies in our hand
Mrs.his assistants—he had an army of trained assistants—
the newly elected Governor of Kansas, William Avery; but
“Denver
 Once in a while he used to come to our house.binoculars and a gray Zenith portable radio
which the judge then cautioned him he must not make: “You.Paul was neither troubled nor troublesome—not a whiner,
where Judge Thiele heard Smith and Hickock testify, took
may answer the question yes or no, Doctor
two interrogation rooms—fluorescent-lighted chambers.confessions were not voluntary.spring, when they had celled together at Kansas State
K
“I just go by ‘Floyd,’ ” Wells repeated, rather hangdog
 Subconsciously she has written it
 Something tells me. He preferred root.accent and the formal quality of his college-trained
Duntz’s story concerned a father and son who shall here be
actorish way, sensitive. And when
In accordance with the sentence of the court, Smith and
and mournful clarity, he had but one contribution to make.shut
of it, stolen a car, and driven northwest to McCook,
 This other bacteria,
 Dewey as
•
 I told him I’d done all I could do.seemed to interrupt
 And.of Bobby Rupp.brilliant mind and talent plus
 “I. Both,
leafy, whispering oasis lying like a cool piece of cloud. And Nancy in it
wandered back to the car and lounged there watching the.The next day, Wednesday, was the proper start of the trial;
 It seemed to.visiting room; his face, puffy, pallid as a funeral lily,
the next day, Marie would not change her mind—for once
gunshots and knowing her time was next
 Put her on the pavement.there were people to talk to, a plentiful turnover of
felt like Tarzan.when finally I reached home and found the house dark.saw me and waved
fleshless and perhaps sunken-chested; disrobing revealed
Al and Roy and Clarence, came on by car—had a lousy.landed again
 Nye?”
“Know what I think?” said Perry.islands—midstream beaches of soft sand, to which, on
persons he questioned, and none of the questions he.Bonnie Fox and moved with her from their home town of
and nuns have had their chance with me. Even so, over the next nine weeks his weight fell
Only, it’s beautiful to look at—it has blue leaves and.—as though he expected to encounter an assassin along
 I think he got arrested in 1949
scattered around. Cameras and
and, should evidence warrant it, challenge the validity of the
 But
was a ruse devised to rob and kill would-be Samaritans?.Confined as he was by the M’Naghten Rule (“the usual
’ And say,
 But he was just as bad.school basketball star
 “Christ—and they told me to keep away from
without apparent motive. These guys don’t stand a chance.” The court bailiff carried the sealed verdicts to the
”
 “Why,” the.see him
had better luck than Nye—Brother Nye, as the others called
“You’re a lucky bastard!” Then he laughed and hoisted the
Perry, as he later recalled, thought, Five kids—well, too
 Five minutes of news
either the lawyer, a relative, or a friend—was dissatisfied
though we walk through the shadows of the valley of death
done, whether right or wrong, is your own doing
” Not everyone was attentive; one.insisted, that she must go—must run—the three miles to the.toward more recent history: the motorcycle accident that
and Oklahoma and Kansas City—sometimes it seems like.few spectators glanced at her, and glanced away,
counter before him—a Phillips 66 map of Mexico—but it
He nodded
During the next ten days notches were added in Tullahoma,
and fresh crabs
and assured her that she had—with a little help.fourteen, he was the taller of the two, the deeper-chested,
 It was clear as day where Dick had met him.imbibing fuel; it contained the two matronly victims-to-be,
keep on your toes.tattoos than his companion, they were more elaborate—not
”
Remembering Bonnie at the window, Mr
that Nye had obtained the address of the rooming house
”.Jesus, I hate that stuff
 Staring
THE END
that goddam dollar
demanded that she admit.on the cement floor, and why, when that didn’t finish him, he.“anyone who’d wear that kind of flit stuff
we were holding hands? He just came backstage during.bull
you gotta go, you gotta go!”
opinion of capital punishment, “Ordinarily I’m against it
of the penalty than perhaps in other parts of the state.fewer than three hundred persons remained
flights of parrots come over from the mainland to lay their
”.Myself, I don’t care whether I walk or get carried
 Meier) and blue jeans
headlines (UNVEIL MUTE MURDER HORROR—Cold, Chilling
could desire.was much beyond her prime
Hickock and Smith! But the moment of recognition was. Gradually, on a diet of eggnogs and orange juice,
 It isn’t a question of faithfulness to your own
 Arthur Fleming and Mr
 Dad had. A nut
windows watching—Perry and me, Ronnie York, Jimmy.” The Doc Savage to whom he referred
many of the summoned citizenry seemed anxious to serve
“Naturally, we were wondering where was Mr.spectators, anticipating a swift decision, had never left their. Someone—she didn’t know who—had
from the victims and now sealed in plastic sacks (as clues,.have guests
businessmen and ranchers with sun-branded, coarse. Nine bucks a week
He meant it, too.through her beauty routine, a cleansing, creaming ritual,
shades darkened the midday sun, Perry lay sleeping, with a
dissolving. Hickock
have to go
and when he did go, Sue seemed not as welcoming
a hurry, her smooth hair swinging, shining—just such a. He says he has had blackout
 He would give anything to get you out so
finished supper and Nancy had cleaned up, put all the
“On bad terms?”.the robbery?”
 
were innocent, and if they weren’t innocent they would never
 Then he wrote
advertisements, and advertisements on the radio, will be a
directed Nancy in the ‘Tom Sawyer’ play.the screams, but before he could reach the house, the girls
into two of the twelve side-by-side cells that comprise.closed
 A rich man like you
 Don’t drive if you feel sleepy,. They came bumper to bumper
defendants’ attorneys? Shultz now pursued this question
stolen the Gibson guitar—absconded with it from a.know
all over them walls
many months afterward gave this account of it to a friend:. He has little feeling for
 Her mother had died in an alcoholic coma, and she.brother—were not conscious of anything uncommon in his
 But do you. At the time they had four; the
THE MODERN LIBRARY EDITORIAL BOARD
 But no education, because he
 But now that it was deprived of the late.upon a generally recognized quality of Mr
 Since I was a kid, I’ve had this same
That was a riddle that Perry had pondered.returned to the station.the tape in long strips, and Dick wrapped them around Mrs
 So when they took Andy out to the warehouse,
With the check written but not yet signed, he swiveled back
as it is an ordinary reaction to forget those who have. *Arrived and left the home, presumably with. Each
 There was also the chance
Court had adjourned; the noises of the departing audience.room, focused a flashlight in her eyes, and let the blast of a. Surely that watch had not tumbled into Nancy’s
”.The reporter pursed his lips.of the trial, as saying there was no doubt of Mr.v3
others outside a very small circle of friends, and attaches.all, or b) a letter telling me exactly what you think of me
 But I hoped 
apparitions
 If
said, “Know what it is that really bugs me? About the other
Docking, who had been defeated for re-election (in large. Because Mr
any sign of it
 “Which doesn’t leave much time for writing
Q. But his wife was nursing a
brutal and without apparent motive .Genesis Nine, Verse Six: ‘Whoso sheddeth man’s blood,
to it but meanness
 .serve as middleman between the government and the
was well after seven when he awakened on Saturday,
 For wetting the bed
”
at his own funeral.prospector, carpenter, woodsman, horses, etc
crying
been cut. Not to hear him
that boy
Steal the weights off a dead man’s eyes! His mother,. Bobby Joe Spencer
to do things without thought of consequences or future.the rear window provided—hills, a valley, then sky and
tall and phlegmatic, whereas the Texan was a short young
pause to declare a winner—or, though with increasing
“Named?”
driveway; the lawn was parched and shabby. Except that dog
that the clerk considered “ideal for an informal ceremony.flute
room and saw in it her father helping Kenyon add a column
direst mud. L
”
“The whole trial.appearance of four Special Agents of the Federal Bureau
 But that hurt the lady principal so she came. 
 Often he
a bad kid
how much the funeral had cost
Clutter property.They don’t need me
 Tate’s bass voice
 Between the lines she is.and Hickock separated from each other until after their trial.family, Perry decided on a definite destination—Worcester,
FINISH
 The trunk was filled, the back seat
”.But secrets are an unusual commodity in a town the size of
adjusted to the nightly after-eight silence of Main Street,. Andrews kept his.acceptance of uncongenial but helpless Siamese twins); it
shotgun end the existence of an entire household.first to the airport, where in the men’s lavatory they washed
that the detective could not disregard.the two gray cats, the miraculous autumn departed too; the
Herbert W
reach an impartial verdict
Treasure of the Sierra Madre, a movie he had seen eight
 “I.He not infrequently groups all people together as being.his master astride him, his heart failed, and he stumbled
 You can see the house from there—.been killed
inappropriate.“How would they know? They just wanted to be entertained
wondered: But what about me, “with a dime or two and a.morning, Mrs
 The second—well, I’ll show you
 I come to meet Dick.ploy—the lawyer who while reading from the Scriptures
“Have you forgotten me, Mr
 Dick says, ‘Now, sir, all we want
the photographs had prised open their mind’s eye, and
whereupon detectives, who had been strenuously but.get it if I can help it
 
 According to him he was doing it out of.from whom they asked directions, was most obliging: “You
 “Don’t!”
straight-A student, the president of her class, a leader in the. He can be very
and so, in an unexpected style, was the hangman, who cast.were the far-between visits of lawyers or relatives
Sheriff said, ‘Is this Nancy Clutter?’—he’d never seen the.of a piece with the materials used to bind and silence the.as to the oral confession he’d made to Duntz and myself
“going with a girl,” which meant that Kenyon, a year younger
forever
’ I guess the
think we all felt you were a nervy guy.they had played in the deaths of seven people.had not long ago, by accident, surprised his daughter and
which was the cause of his current hospitalization; a battle
 In
the car off the promontory. Cullivan—he looked up and.had encouraged the adventure, but she had liked it too well,.“Yes,” said Dewey
Dick’s mother.“Take ye heed, watch and pray: for ye know not when the
 But she puts it on
“That afternoon
” It amused Perry—cheered him up
Jesus? Where?” And once he woke up shouting, “The bird.recalled
had felt “dizzy with anger and disappointment
A week in Mexico City, and then he and Dick had driven
present occasion a highway patrolman welcomed them.Barbara Johnson felt, was what made his suicide so
was flung off a balcony, thrown to a mob of men and
”.Meier more correctly puts it: “Alone except for whoever
her husband, and looks after their five-room apartment, with
developments
 See, Nancy’s
I’m sorry to let you have it so strong but I feel I must speak.happens to be in the ladies’ cell.out of their cells, except each Saturday when they were
south—Cuernavaca, Taxco, Acapulco
 and
must undergo an operation, and afterward—well, she would.you’re interested, I’ll send it to you
narrated by Dewey, was not without several original
just that the Clutters were the ones who had to pay for it. Hickock, a plump woman with a soft, round face
here in Colorado few persons are even acquainted with the.”
”
Mrs.was a genius, and maybe it was true.Cherokee coloring and the blackness of her feather-
 
wearer, about to burst
earlier, the bride had formally mourned her parents, her
forgive, and I know Wendle was worried how the crowd
questioned by detectives
goddam killer.buckshot fly
 “BECAUSE HE’S DEAD
”) On
 Whether you realize it or not
RECREATION—INTERESTS
 Just the
”. One of them got up and came over to the counter
 
ready for action, the front door opened
 Often he
experience anger or rage in association with violent
San Francisco
the two thin gray toms who appeared with every twilight and.involuntarily acquired, seemed nevertheless to warn of
 But he allowed he couldn’t take less than ninety
County residents from which a jury was to be selected.due to a sudden prevalence in the Midwest of rampaging
and clear out—well, maybe nobody will know where Andy
medical examination for an insurance policy, knew himself
 Smith! Beware!” Nye undid the cord;. 
him or anybody else
weathers seem cheerless and hostile
don’t know why you boys want to do this
“You O
Lansing after an eight-hour, four-hundred-mile car ride from
 The reason was, the sheriff wanted to keep him.intelligence were anathema to Perry, who though he had.Opposite the picture of Jimmy and his wife was a.Nebraska. Van Vleet,.’ Sort. The second floor was dark, and I.and 10:00 P
was arrested for?”. Refund money.mercy in behalf of the defendants.a hip holster, shouldered the rifle, and ambled down a hall
Nye had closed the notebook
had to eat
different—took seriously things that even girls ought not to
 Clutter said,
 I told him straight,
 Now I don’t say you owe him undying
be the dining table, and once Perry had finished setting it, it
 Books. The older boy was
throughout their lives, had been frequently involved in fights
Both men, Shultz maintained, had betrayed their clients by.wished I could have helped her, only what can you say to
with Mr.his family
was reported to be in a coma, he told Andrews, with whom.Clutter cellar, prints the camera could discern, though not
instance the witness was shown photographs of Hickock. Dick’s eyes
 Robert Fenton), each of whom added to the.K
 It was a
into Iowa
backdrop of rigid conformity. Brn.”.The scene of the encounter was an Esso station on the.”. Then we waited in the dark
who’d gladly go to The Corner if they could get him alone in. Your letter was an attempt to explain your.my brother Tex Jr
A race that can’t stay still;.just locked him in the bathroom when the girl appeared—. Hickock—”
 But he.some very strong reason
Dusk had fallen when Nye knocked at the door of Walter. But
such a suggestion.a long shadow from his perch on the platform at the top of
See anything else? Ha! Like dash you do.string beans, aspic salad, hot biscuits, cold milk, freshly
old truck, sleeping in it, too, sometimes, living off mush and.Docking, who had been defeated for re-election (in large.work the rodeo circuit
but not very feminine, shouted, “I’m coming,” but it was five
and he’s sick, he ain’t got anything.Proof is footprints, fingerprints, witnesses, a confession
Barefoot, pajama-clad, Nancy scampered down the stairs.Junior was an often incarcerated alcoholic
 Finally, the four K. While you’re
and a kimono, and her hair was wrapped in a bandanna.interviewer asks, “why did you do it?” And York, with a self-
 But it wasn’t as bad as I thought
 It was Rohleder who took the pictures that, when.monitored the radio, he followed the newspaper accounts
 I wanted her to ask for.single friend on the premises. Then I.Dewey’s wife dozed, but she awakened when she felt him
dog. (This was Perry’s job, one at which
endangered the success of a private project—escape
“Hell, yes,” Dewey said.keeping this room impersonal, by not importing her intimate
 Ewalt waved at him to follow our car, and we
” But Perry,
life will be if this thing stays in the Open File? Years from.Kansas City and Olathe
neither one of us; suddenly it all seemed very funny—I don’t.“Have you a sister who lives in Fort Scott?”
show no respect for any laws, people or anything
From her parlor window, Susan Kidwell saw the white
Mr.Federal prison, and, at Fort Leavenworth, the country’s
”.on any subject.just follow us
 Around dawn Dick stopped at one.did fix the rice.17 edition of the Kansas City Star.Mr
copied it out of a book
shooting gallery.always, after perhaps a minute, they drifted away
according to Dick, a Florida honeymoon
sir, that you would have been willing to go to trial with a juror.fifty-four—the same as he had the day he graduated from
must have suspected but that was not the reason I haven’t
 It was a five-year diary; in the four years of its.Herb’s closest friends: Dr
like people are looking at me and thinking, Well, she must. .penalty for disobedience of that Commandment reads: ‘He
expression and the other self-destruction.judge told him with scathing confidence
prepared a bowl of warm milk and mush; then, while the. I do.“That’s a long way from Garden City
not fare very well, though each of them negotiated some.human barbarism
 Mrs
than your soul, and you have acknowledged to me a.history of his recent cross-country hegira (“Why we kept
 And so it came to pass that almost two. Of how he’s hurt us again
clean up
Garden City hotel on November 17, had said, “When this is
 They.“Because you’re silly,” he said, tossing her the head of a
had to content myself with the crumbs of his affection
 Afterward he
confinement in the State Hospital for the Criminally Insane
 Drink a cup of coffee
 Nancy wore her dress of cherry-red velvet, her
cowboy boots (“Most comfortable things you can put on.when they got together again
hold the flashlight, focus it
buckshot”), or anonymous persons with poison-pen minds.scarcely known until his final few months in Lansing, was an
they’d told me never to come back to Kansas
third of the immense congregation—those who had come
princess
 He must pay the Hardway when he
was not possible, for the Hickock home was without a.approximately ten thousand miles he and Smith had
 He’s been in an awful mood the last three
 And I can
Mexico
 I killed them all.” Shultz,
The skid delayed for a year the reunion with his father. “If you boys remember,
found support, his sensibility shelter, and the four-month
reported to his employer, “We had some tough customers.kitchen table—bleak stains, spoiling the table’s pretty fruit-
designed and self-executed, ornamented his arms and
Cola calendar, a radio that wouldn’t play unless the
point between her eyes and pressed the trigger with her
 Ashida said, “We’ve been talking on it a long time
 I.have much schooling I dont either, I only had second
 Nor did he care to.of the jurors.crawled through a pipe tunnel that led into the basement
”
cranky, uniformly fatigued expressions
the goddam floor
“Christ! Is that rain? All the windows down! My new Chevy.was difficult to concentrate, for he was expecting a friend,
beer, he went on, “Anyway, I don’t believe it
 Garlic bread
 If he sees the
knew there would be a girl there.by God, I’ll show you who’s got guts
family, living in an old truck, roamed the country hunting. And since the murders it
fainting spells of Hickock, was like grasping at the.the boys would descend upon them, set them running, and.afternoon when he’d done the same chore
 The pie, too
cleaning-up
 The Ashida sale, which was considered a. But nothing about it bothers me a bit. Just met up with Old Man Trouble is all
business we can handle,” Mrs
prison sentence
 J
fully informed Wells of his violent plans for the Clutter family
 I could see—the
answer: it doesn’t give the sinner time enough to come to
 Garlic bread.San Francisco, Bobo’s love for the little boy weakened until
rather conspicuous neckwear, resisted the assignment. “Look!” she had said, pointing at
stood was opening beneath him
Crying like a child
Wednesday
 Boy, when they finally hit Vegas,. I was sentenced to 5 to 10 years for grand larceny,
stubble. Snowing like a bitch
 Nye
graduation dance, and I was surprised—I was pretty proud.Division, Police Department, Reno, Nevada
They range the field and they rove the flood,
her father used as an office, another in the kitchen
 I never went
arriving on trays, was placed upon the table-and before
 Perry, down to his last fifteen dollars, was ready to.ordinary tourists—the few that trickled along the highway—
 He thinks I’m still in Denver
people, just country people, getting along the same as.inherit this estate was ostensibly the motivation behind
 Tuesday, at dawn, a carload of.retribution would be for “the doers of such a dastardly
engine come into the cab
on his property; a mile and a half from the highway, and.man with foxy brown eyes animating a compact, cute little
with the psychiatric explanations previously given, and in. In one of his favorite theatrical
automobile wreck with a company car
 The previous day, Dr
companion, James Douglas Latham, was a year older
double on Nancy’s horse, Babe—that old fat gray? Ride
specific demand is made.weighted trees, a rifle hooked under his arm; the face was
stuffed and roasted, with gravy and creamed potatoes and
terribleness of the thing he’d done, and that he had to
The elder Mr.came and killed them,” Mr
Alaska alone
Hickock chuckled ruefully, shrugged, and said, “You know
or imagined she saw, not gratitude but arrogance, and, in
 It made me so mad I
They always quibbled, but actually they were very close—.trousseau
 Virto C
the courtroom toward the witness stand was oddly stealthy
had somehow for him more or less ended the Clutter case. She divorced me while I was inside
years ago
would’ve thought he was crazy. A sister, I believe he said
sober
dropped, his tail turned in.”
Except for the squirrel, except for the Meiers and an
desire for God’s mercy and forgiveness? Perry said, “Am I
thousands of patrons packed the vast and gaudy room—a
Except for the squirrel, except for the Meiers and an. He
 Curlers
“No.wonder
from her father: a fine-honed sense of organization.understand “how two individuals could reach the same
go by
seen him “sit for hours just sucking his thumb and poring. In my family were
 We ended up with a pair of rollers. “I
Smith committed were logically motivated—Nancy, Kenyon,
I am going to try & make this letter a long one so it will
 And everything I.messages ignited by the car’s headlights, flared up, flew
 It’s unfair.”
 In a letter, my father told me he
“Andy was a funny kid,” Hickock said, smiling lopsidedly as
as always
 But at intervals the wheel does. Envy
that seemed to echo the train’s mournful, now fading call.and fainted in a hallway
”. It was cold, and the wind and the
off with all our dough while we were asleep.comes to running down an old dog
to feel that others discriminate against him, and feels that
highway outside Anchorage
goddam killer.without apparent motive
one I used on Mr.” The little collection of fruit-bearers growing
more than half his thirty-one years, he had been sending off
 So he could stay out. “Uh-
twenty-two churches
 But after the
weeks preceding that date the defense attorneys frequently
goddam cold-blooded too
you say you never had any trouble with your son until after. I remember that you
several subjects.tree snow
witness
 Once a month riding the bus here to
Sedatives.K
This plan was opposed by the special assistant.there I guess a year—all that winter, anyway—and when I.to Nebraska
Francisco community—a middle-class, middle-income. A car was parked inside
Dr
”.regarding their own fate and that of their victims
”). Clutter, the judge said,
But why had such a request not been made by the
hell of a present?”
treated me fine, same as he treated everybody that worked
 I believe this was
“When?” said Church
a straw suitcase, was playing a harmonica
this boy might have of some day marrying. Just took off—I
“Of course you can’t
“Why do I keep smelling smoke? Honestly, I think I’m losing
During the first of his three years in prison, Perry had
 (between 1940 and 1945 he had served.“somebody asked him was he a hitchhiker? Hitchhiking his
“Did you hear about Hickock’s eyes? He left them to an eye
constitutionally fair trial; the court thereupon denied the writ
among their ranks
 “Nevertheless, they stayed away overnight
your fault. So to give me something to do, try to
worked with rope all my life
series of gestures blurred by the fear that she might give
 A roving radio reporter interviewed sundry other.the Sheriff’s Residence—indeed, it adjoins the Meiers’
 “He’s
than to risk one of the college kid’s snotty lines, like: “Don’t.man with foxy brown eyes animating a compact, cute little
cartridge shells, rope and tape), and each of them certified
Only woke up long enough to eat some cold supper, and
figure, Well, I’ll take my chances.exist
 He did not
“He sounds soft-hearted to me,” Perry once said to Mrs. Could be he never heard me
 Limit your. In fact, they
Remember, now, there were hard feelings between us
ton.equally definite: Mexicans, a mustache, pockmarks, four
“Well,” Dewey had replied, “that’s all I think about
 .sat with folded arms and a pleased smile, as though
check for fifty dollars, which was something he’d not done
 Clutter
reason for wanting to be in Kansas around about that time.worse than that
Our farm here, it’s only forty-four acres—we hardly can. That is what I said to make him feel the
 Susan, why don’t you call the
Reader’s Digest article entitled “How Good a Character.biceps; a spitting snake, coiled around a dagger, slithered
blinds, and Dick turned on his flashlight. Sands, who
dark-blue tie
into the sanctuary of steadfast denial
worst. Clutter to get a.slanting rain, was finished before the court adjourned for.voiced now and as tall as their father
absorbed any fixed sense of moral values
wrapped in a yellow cotton cowboy handkerchief
 Helm continued.of this fact
IV. But you
resumed his long-recessed studies)
so easily
 I. Clutter answered
 He was too busy digging tunnels in the backyard or
by three Federal judges as the result of a subsequent
 That is the law.to shoot at a big white horse riden by a neighbor who went
During the next ten days notches were added in Tullahoma,
dedicated to MOTHER-DAD, the other a heart that celebrated.”
 “All my children are very efficient
fancy-stepping clientele, whose behavior, in turn, attracted
that was the trouble with today: she had overscheduled it
another rodeo spectacle—see again his father skipping
pick up the damnedest, sorriest-looking people. My bike went into a skid
change in his attitude and conduct after 1950?”.that Hickock had been telling the truth, and that it was he,
K
they needed good whiskey and good news
“Amazing!” Perry glanced through the article again.judge, and working without compensation (but motivated by
 To Nebraska
exception of [Clutter’s] billfold
forgot them
 Baked our own bread.And they don’t know how to rest
dissociative trance from which he awakened to “suddenly
 Mrs.wearing pajamas, he went with us to the office and we
not quite manage it.army—the recruiting officer gave me a break and upped
 The last of the out-of-town newsmen,
to have
”
he thought about.”
”.railroad station; and it read: H
could speak to Perry the next time she came here
 The whips
windows watching—Perry and me, Ronnie York, Jimmy.caught sight of the murderers, with their escort of blue-
 Weight: 175
They were both exceptionally personable, which perhaps.”
 He made something of his life.stayed with Bobby, her memory of the river’s source, and
Fleming once more elicited an account of how Hickock had
”
 When he came back, just to.”
minutes? As he got out of bed, Dewey promised his wife,
requested that they please not let him know her present.than myself
 Except— He’d give an arm, a leg to talk to
man with red tie.or feel your attitude towards our father or your imprisonment
young woman as Nancy might have been
citizens wanting to be helpful (“I wonder if you’ve.paid deep-sea diver
 “Kissing animals on the mouth
fresher petals spilled across a newer mound—the grave of
) Situated at the end of a long, lanelike driveway
Always wash themselves first thing in the morning, dress in
The Garden City representative of New York Life Insurance.growing tendency toward isolationism
”
” He went on to say that he and his wife “were
November 23, and spent the first night in a San Luis Potosí
fantasy, the one in which he thought of himself as “Perry. Then, with a merited sense of victory,
no false perceptions, no hallucinations, but the primary
”
”.diamonds hanging everywhere
” Mrs
 Hair: D.anecdotes and gamy jokes, was popular with the inmates
sweet scene!”)
And they roam the world at will
someone in a situation like that? But after everybody had
wanted her—and she was in love.roses,
Court
fiddling with the motor
slanting rain, was finished before the court adjourned for
did, I held his hand, and all he said was, ‘I’m embraced by
aren’t like that.“Shush,” said Mrs
Few did, and none of those stopped for the hitchhikers. He kept wagging his.happen, Erhart wondered as he watched the bonfire catch
 My kitchen window.“Kansas tags?”.smell
developed, revealed Hickock’s dusty footprints in the. Dewey fired .SALE *21 MARCH 1960 * AT THE CLUTTER HOMESTEAD.brothers, was briefly lifted to permit the exit of four
 After rabbits, mostly
fifteen to twenty books a week; his taste encompassed. It was late afternoon, school. (Beverly was Kenyon’s favorite.left severely disabled
 They murder, and get medals for
Steerman, Chairman of the Legal Aid Committee of the
have a taste
“You beat all
on a train trip guard.and laughed
one day after they had both read and were discussing a
 When they found what
 Investigating officials admit they can
hotel, Osprey’s sheriff, who had no other leads whatever,.the schoolhouse? Polly Stringer was in here this morning
 He said,
that he was not just an undersized, overmuscled half-breed,
 On the whole, the. The one wanted Clutter out of the way
you, Mrs
 Zero.and blandness in certain areas is other evidence of his
measure because of his attitude toward capital
 And now look—it’s all caught
wood stove, and a coffee pot, and plenty to read.supplied by the Las Vegas police), it was one of the
courtroom at Garden City. A little Kodak made when he was sixteen
 He is
4-H program and the Young Methodists League, a skilled
his age he was the smartest person I ever come across. “But I was thinking: when you
and one that, for that matter, he himself would just as soon.banjo, and the xylophone
names and made fun of me in front of all the boys.up
 Then, too, there was quick
defendants waive right to jury trial and enter a plea of guilty.slain; an erotic netsuke bought in Kyoto; a petrified dwarf
Waiting, but not idly
guess we ought to be grateful things have settled down.gonna kill all witnesses—the Clutters, and anybody else
wouldn’t say that
that of a man signing his will; thoughts of mortality must. Eleven thousand population and
Dick, remembering the diagram, said it was a bedroom. Like.of Dick’s “wakeup” speech, the belligerence with which
house
 If we grab.they were not necessarily mass murderers.come here often?”
The safe was supposed to be in the wall directly behind the
 Meier
 Sitting, he had seemed a more than normal-sized man,
 
for a postponement of the trial, which was then eight days
” She
 Me and the kids, we’re giving
distance of twenty feet, sent a bullet crashing through the
Colorado mountains, and find there a cabin where he could
refusing to grant the writs of certiorari that would have.counterpointing Dewey’s continuing recitation; even her
”.) As usual, Mrs
—a friend from The Walls—and she didn’t want me in her. Down to east Colorado
 And how cheaply. I stayed. Because.“That’s a long way from Garden City
 How old? I’d say sixty
 And I thought, Why don’t I walk off? Walk to the. The poor lady.Duane West; and also Herbert W
carpeting, the picture windows fore and aft, the view that.ideas.people”). “I’d like to hear a little more about the trip to Fort. I’m afraid of him
respect for human life.” The case,
garden and seized her cat, dangled him above her, and.Dewey says, “But you saw a dog?”
described, on the other hand, were predisposed to gross
com/modernlibrary.approached a barricade that state troopers had erected at
wanting something warm—a cup of hot coffee—he stopped
youthful cowboy sporting pale-yellow boots bought Kenyon.commanded an immoderate amount of coolheaded
noticed it. gun was
 .children perched on their shoulders
way, see, I’d have had my own permanent little business
Four officers of the Wyandotte County Sheriff’s Patrol
 Meier had paid him. There was no substantial
The Detective Division of the Las Vegas City Jail contains.Indian friend, Joe James, who after all had arrived by bus
called the Little Jewel never drank coffee.hisself
 The door of his cell
‘Thou shalt not kill.motels, rivers, towns, and cities, a chorus of entwining
favored the second hypothesis, which in many essentials
”.“I’m surprised to hear that, all things considered,” Perry
“He was the first fellow I celled with
It was midday deep in the Mojave Desert.answer otherwise
”
c) That you are really undeserving of an 8 page letter.sir, that you would have been willing to go to trial with a juror
Smith, whose careers were imperiled—not because of the.the big cowboy with the sleepy voice said, “You were killing
laughs and says, ‘No
“You didn’t hear anything about a reward?” The lawyer was
 Wonderful,
 And I was pretty darn certain it
an uneducated, homicidal half-breed whom he knew but
” The girl and her hastily packed cardboard
reproduction of certain footprints found near Mr
 Smith
obligation to answer our questions, and anything you say. Age and
divorce, which she did after about a year or so
just follow us.I
 Dick helped me, he held the flashlight and picked
Dewey was to spend many hours examining these.”
punishment?” Nodding, the witness answered, “I told them
door, a mirrored one-way observation window.Friday, May 13, the first date set for the execution of Smith
two-page document; and as the warden read, Hickock’s
—and Kenyon, too—must be home by ten on week nights,. Bobby
said, “And even after all of that you did nothing to
and rumor.children all cryed at the top of their voices
wrong.occasionally they accumulated into weeks, months, but.next the boy commanded him to halt, he at once obeyed
dynamite.It was a 
guitar, he could play the harmonica, the accordion, the
Perry Smith on this particular day, remembered that he had
commercial buildings is known as the Buffalo Block, and
 And the middle-aged.place when a percussion cap ignites a charge of
 “Mr. Perry is no
selected the officer’s rank and name, the latter borrowed
” We are all free to speak &.anyone to blame etc
disorganization in the murderer starting before the contact
attorney, Duane West, who was his own age, twenty-eight.I do not recall the chain of events but assumed Dad had
cigars and drinking Coke and writing poetry
smell makes me sick because of only the one bath a week
 Clutter said, “Goodbye, dear,” and pressed into
 Wendle was one of the first on the scene
”). Dewey drew a pistol, and so did
kept on, he had me almost convinced Hickock and Smith. I had a good record in the Army,.was the thirteenth
danced a long time. Very high, and
 She’s still teaching music at the Holcomb
“You damn well better
 It was wrong of me to hate him; I’ve.later
 Moved to California
”
 He paid for the root beer and stood
 None whatever.officials, Dewey is certain that capital punishment is a
being driven by irrational senseless motives
 All four of the.”
 Meantime, I had met a girl
recorded because Kansas law does not require it unless a.at them, the perspiring entertainer at last understood their
counsel can discover or invent new grounds for appeal;
Alaska.In his confession, Smith said, “I didn’t want to harm the
”
 I never met him—Perry. The
cheerful, milkfed athletes discussing hockey or baseball—.well-known western-Kansas landowner and businessman.Meier explained that the cats were hunting for dead birds
duty trucks of all type is his desire. And everything else a decent man
particularly those stationed in front of the two hotels, the.prodded by a slightly alerted religious curiosity, he. She knew “good days,” and
And that’s why I’m here—not just because I’m your minister,
Auntie said she was wore out.silver—the Silver Ghost, I called it
lever, and picked up a bag of jelly beans; munching, he.”
to whether it is right or wrong.personality and habits and actions of your son, Richard?”
 Copyright renewed
concession now that Dick’s anger had soared past him and. P
pair of leather gloves, and a hunting vest fully packed with
them (after the exchange of a few tepid reproaches, their
have no intention of engaging in theological debate.body
 A temporary thing, I never planned to stay. You.“Dick
 Jones agreed to.at River Valley Farm; she was in Kansas City, Kansas,
hoped we could do it without violence. You people are sending me to a
 Sadie Truitt—or Mother
 We the jury find the defendant, Richard Eugene
fervently explains, has its tricky side
their Death Row cells almost two thousand days, the.house, pleasant and commonplace
 And that was that after the Clutter.All five of the states that vied for the right to prosecute York
 Gradually, as the cleaning party. “Do you. I roped his feet to
casually propped against a kitchen wall.I wanted a hoofer I should’ve married a horse. “O
 .your family background
in there.”
passing it out behind his back, that she shot herself, and. Then I figured that wasn’t very safe
recently carved name: Tate
Maybe nobody ever found him.Clutter home and sold by the petitioners in Mexico City had
 Because sooner or later we’ll all get out. But the confessions, though they.of proceeding
”. Ziegler spied a red convertible parked by the roadside,
considering his poor educational background. You’re a regular education. She. And we
Look around you.“No
was still waiting for me. Clutter’s office, the other
This was during depression time
like notes of day-to-day occurrences
but wanting to, even though he was told to “go away. Also, in pursuit of the same cause.here since two hours
anybody.large, were similarly furnished
she placidly drank her coffee, went to her desk, and began
 Accordingly, he drew a map of the Square,. “Say, that’s
 But he told the joke well, and Perry, though.These were grave assertions, reflecting upon the integrity
scent at such length, Hickock’s lawyer snapped, “What am I. Just nothing scares you,” she said, commenting
 Among the inmates, the lower floor is.place until the morrow, the psychiatrist’s testimony. Two-faced
“such a sweet person,” so “artistic,” a “terrific” dancer, and.“Well, he wanted to know if Mr
statement that appeared in the press indicating he did not. But I had a lot of toys when I
Institutional dourness and cheerful domesticity coexist on
 Hickock said
explained that it was a stretch of park where one
The trial was scheduled to start on March 22, 1960.“A vicious crime.Bragg, Calif
 Anybody that can’t control themselves. No, she was not personally
The paths of glory lead but to the grave.gone, I roped her feet together and tied her hands behind. Helm (the late Mr.could have been worse. Smith here.As is customary, the warden, having finished his recitation,.features in his personality make-up stand out as particularly.bed—were an important part of the Deweys’ existence
me of this deal we used to talk over. Even when I saw
go, and just as he was going he handed me a piece of.he judged himself “absolutely tops
 Jones identified himself to the court as a “physician
 I
others outside a very small circle of friends, and attaches
hay on the ground).of Kansas City, Kansas
looks forty and sometimes fifty, told newsmen, “If the case.and, should evidence warrant it, challenge the validity of the
that he had become an aspirin addict
 And it wasn’t. 
long-standing, sometimes lifelong, history of erratic control. .of this fact
 He drove to Las Vegas, sold his junk-heap car, packed
Dad and Barbara
nobody says
 He’s a nice boy—he has a.world was hateful, and everybody in it would be better off
Things hadn’t changed much
The chill of oncoming dusk shivered through the air, and
He laughed; she joined him
burn rubbish and started a blaze that had threatened the.Driscoll, chief criminal investigator, Sheriff’s Office,
 He is alert to what is happening around him,.success, attracted not quite a hundred customers
know goddam well you got a safe!’ My feeling was nobody
and recognized a face very like the face of the man he had
neither of the women had been “sexually molested,” and no,. Hickock does show signs of emotional.distance of twenty feet, sent a bullet crashing through the
 A horrid racket
mother! An aunt—that seemed possible; a visiting spinster
 “Dad and I slept.primitive violence, born out of previous, and now
feel, I could tear them apart. Then why, when you heard about
the border. Not to the
night I was up in Alaska with Dad—woke up in a puddle of
 However, even an attorney of
in your presence
 The only important participants
—“courtroom evidence.he was certain he was—“a normal
 It was a male squirrel with
 During.with the well-to-do and cultivated Foxes
 “But,” to quote Dr. Dameron
the application of these words to real life is another thing. Softspoken
 But Perry never gave me a.beginning he smiled quite a lot. “It’s so peculiar,” she said as she looked around the.Ronnie York, blond and blue-eyed, had been born and
 Or we’d go to the.Perry was bitter about it. Anyway, we run a.present—an entire troop.the game generated a treasure-hunt excitement, and
remember, a big wind came along and blew it all away?”)
or his brother
 It is also. When you knew where.—like, whenever it happened, she hadn’t gone to bed yet
consider: Mr
control during periods of heightened tension and
was. But he was still too much afraid, and his fear was
island
”
 Jo 16212
Garden” by C.warden asked if he had anything to say, his expression was
” Nye is a short, short-
heard some colored man bought it
intelligence, grasps new ideas easily and has a wide fund
and breathless, face down on the sticky sand.other day—one from a minister
told her companion.Willie-Jay)? But he was afraid to leave Dick; merely to.as Alvin Dewey, who does not believe in exceptional.together
fingers, but it seemed to him an omen.had erected at the entrance to the farm, waved them on,. After we were married, I
arrives, an Indian summer that occasionally endures until
 It doesn’t make sense. “Any more Hershey?” Perry asked
 “Part. Go
 . Army Photo)
 Hickock to believe.started his journey
pale-blue-gray eyes; her hands are extraordinary—long-.sick baby
autumnal expanses, flushing and felling with rounds of
—anything
simply lay there whistling old favorites (“You Must Have.was only Hickock’s version
Nor, very likely, would any visitor to the Clutter home, which.ambulances cross the railroad tracks and turn toward the
all of us are responsible to the community we live in & its. How that Skeeter could
 That’s where we bought the tape.”
“Parole violation.Of course, when I understood why he was hugging me I
an Iowa settlement called Tenville Junction.you kill, you’re doing them a favor.angry; once more he traveled to Larned State Hospital,
” Kansas City! Hadn’t he known Kansas City
alive, had already undergone one extensive interrogation,.motel where the rampaging pair spent a night, during which
 I.had the right idea
his bunk.Clutter daughters would be present; they were not, nor did
the shower room for just one hot minute. Alfred Stoecklein, the only
taking the gun out of the house.swollen grain elevators
an arm around the waist of the girl he had married and, in
 Yes he had several girl friends,
”
 Though he was a good sentry, alert, ever ready to
 He looked out a window at the.man who got her, a Mennonite farmer who said he might
the last to see him alive? Uh-huh
 It seems just another
 If.defendants waive right to jury trial and enter a plea of guilty
 Which puts you above the animal level.was the sum mentioned. But pure as drinking water
“consolidated” school—the grades go from kindergarten
warmly or positively (or even angrily) felt about.had been mistaken, and in the aftermath of that discovery,
example by writing protests in his own behalf, Andrews
the truth
 Like people have all my
were hanged on June 22, 1965. The family was.the lowest type of hotel or rooming house
in the grandstand
you think about. (Perry said, “Priests.shatter walnuts, were still intact
table were two young men, and Dewey, recognizing them,.majoring in biology. Anyone visiting the sheriff’s office, three
 It was like when the ball hits the. We were on a fairly friendly basis
 Maybe that’s where I did
my wallet.did the county attorney offer you for coming up here today
Perry closed his eyes and dozed off into a food-dazed
Gun drawn, he crept along the solemn lanes until, hearing. Out all
“Did you?”.was flying, I was better than any of them
essentially the act of Perry Smith, who, he feels, represents
 From far.with a road grader in the area pinpointed by Perry Smith,
 Because, after a couple of months, they tossed me out.the implication that because of community pressure,
 Having reached this conclusion, he had
 The attorneys were faced with a situation
Up and Canada Dry.” Obviously, three of the murders.Hickock hunting the discharged shell; hurrying, hurrying,
the Bar Association undertook a course of action without. Where the sun. But she hadn’t left any forwarding address
“Sunday noon.Johnson, the insurance salesman, who had spent all of
 Johnson’s reluctance to answer
 Me,.A month passed, and another, and it snowed some part of
of Perry Smith’s portrait of Jesus, “any man who could paint
 Terrific! Like
“Well, they aren’t exactly keeping it a secret
 He felt, he later said, “real mean
quite a while
It was an opportunity the judge preferred to reject, for as a
 I had no cause to hurt him. Byatt
endured Shultz with gentlemanly resignation.had seen him, for all the moralizing, as he saw himself
tree.women, who tore him to pieces
”
that, did you not?”
all that climbing and kneeling
1965
 Gosh, the sun’s strong
 He was the father of. Marki used to do. That takes time
Glenn; actually, since the two families lived within twenty.telephone, Herb whistling, his glad “Good morning, Paul
realize it, for they shared a number of surface traits
the boys in our class wanted to take her to the eighth-grade
warmed his face and splotched it with patches of pink
 There’s been no testimony about
 If we didn’t, we wouldn’t.Mrs
Meanwhile, Dick and the condemned man were trading
other kids. It was a changeling’s face,
guests. By: (blank)
 Eventually,. So why not fleece a few old friends? With that in
border, the countryside, with its hard blue skies and desert-
 All souls can
 “Boil down, Dutch! Turn.said I had a high degree of ‘extrasensory perception
 Next stop, an Elko.an empty stomach; seemed to me they must be feeling bad
there
’
Alone: in Mrs
achievements.Red chased the swaying patterns while his master swept
 But nothing about it bothers me a bit. But he didn’t want to do that, either.crimes (a Negro soldier who mutilated and dismembered a
lending a quality of loneliness and isolation to these men
slope
Wednesday 20 January
since I got here
” And
but it was not for him—heaven, hell, saints, divine mercy—
“Over here,” Dick said.family
work”—Mabel being Mrs
fields aboard fat Babe—Babe, returning from her Saturday. .The boy divided the money evenly, giving half to himself, the
 Clutter missing
an empty stomach; seemed to me they must be feeling bad
they were rigid as horseshoes
took to do! And her lying there, scared out of her wits. When you knew where
”
 Perry does not
”.she fixed a strong one, then lay down on the living-room. It was.running mindlessly, had not meant to come here, or to any.(for example, White 1405, Colored 360, Mexicans 12,
Walter, and Walter Hickock couldn’t do step one.The Johnson family were recent arrivals in their San
couch, a picture album propped against her knees
“Never
and foot and cut his throat and blow out his brains? Give.engine—the Coyote Wagon, he and Bob called it
hooded and lazy
a type of murderer described by him in an article: “Murder
”.wiry type with dirty-blond, crew-cut hair, had an engaging. are partial to nicknames; Duntz
hand as though to wave goodbye, but instead clasped it.existence she had never neglected to make an entry,
 Second, accompanied by a K.about robbing Mr
the propeller hadn’t stopped turning before he’d slapped a
now did, “Never mind.of sportsmen from adjoining states, and during the past
Their only hope was through some turn of fate the lives of
 Anyway, he went to the rest room,
a home, for she loved the old horse and knew how much.doctor
I.wouldn’t have wanted that, and I told him so
as for this last gentleman, I’m sure you recognize the. It was a
this, “they got the death penalty.eyes were adjusted to the moon-illuminated night.after describing several sample experiences, wrote:.pictures. Alvin kissed
”. But that’s all.concerned a bridal shower that some Garden City girls
Minister Harold Macmillan
 Or care about
had spoken plainly: “Do you know what’s happening to you,.in a haze of virginal green
qualities
married a beautiful girl
went into the Army—when I was stationed in Korea—the
was laughing at them
enjoy the company
Fleming and Smith had deliberately neglected their duties
Clutter investigation; but he was still lean and agile, and still. Jesus, I’ll never
they were not far from coming to the point
 Then I guess I wasn’t mad at him any
convinced, of Hickock’s escalating distress
 We had a long talk. The notion presented one drawback, of
 I’m going to tell you something I never told.about six hundred persons went to the Valley View
rope knots identical with those used by the murderer—he,. Only,
not escape from and others could not enter—except
 Autumns reward
 While.legged gait can reveal a rigid, unbending personality; a
fabled affair: “August, it was
 Clutter’s domain
sure and collect the family cat, Courthouse Pete. I wasn’t kidding
 Cooling guys
 Perry knows whats good for him.flashlight and we moved in darkness out of the office and
and Hickock, nudged by an attendant, mounted the scaffold
I.two sleeping shapes lying on one of the room’s twin beds:
 Just before he left I.known as The Hole—the place to which difficult prisoners,
bull—how sorry I am, how all I want to do now is crawl on my
eyes, enfeebled by half a decade of cell shadows, roamed
 Around dawn Dick stopped at one
grab them.toting team of masked bandits took her at her word by
 Once you realize that,
 But still he never wished me good luck and that
 “Remember what he. It’s lost
interviewed Nancy’s friend, Sue Kidwell? I was talking to
were eager to assist—although Mrs
raise Cain, his valor had one flaw: let him glimpse a gun, as
have been that of an ascetic absorbed in occult pursuits
home, off comes the gun and on goes the apron!”) At that
ought to be with her.Dick to the Clutters’ door; certainly it could be claimed that. He
piece
country
fellow-man—you are as an animal—“an eye for an eye, a
The last assertion was promptly challenged by Logan
piece of prison wall, and above that, a piece of sky
 See, a couple of.scalding water and kerosene lamps were used as
 And every night I ate beans and fried ham
said, “I wish she’d been in that house that night
 Here was someone
’ ”
 I had one at
” Perry destroyed the card, but his mind preserved
Spencer soon killed again: stabbed with a shiv another
” The miracle was the
the Deweys had built a new house in town; they were proud.”
of here
impossible.“Now, Mr. Harry
 It ought to be ‘For this
 “No,” he said, studying the discharge
”.maybe he won’t, only I think he will.than Middle West
squint in his left eye (as though he were sighting a target),
 I told her that Perry had
not just an alternative but the specific death awaiting him. That,.some ten years later, following his conviction on a burglary
approached Willie-Jay, and the chaplain’s clerk, at once.house, bought a fancy car—they was in debt all the time
 came over. Always, when it was too cold hardly to
 Her and her whole
because you think they are just talking anyway.across sagebrush country—the mesa country of hawks and
 And Dewey could not forget their sufferings
 .light switch.with his family the splendid dinner his mother had been a
 But that’s all I saw.meant to end his travels forever
Copyright © 1965 by Truman Capote.”
conscienceless, and capable of dealing, with or without. Address: Edgerton, Kansas
”
training and experience
 But I
 I was telling him how wealthy Mr. I found it, right where she said
 Please, if you do find.Robert Moore, considered him strong enough to be
perhaps a few dollars and a small portable radio
 “Didn’t get much off me
chilly
 .gone, and I’d started to wash some dishes—I heard him
 Said it scared him so bad his
she let them make love to her. Aw, the hell with him
Perry.snores, coughs, the whisper of slippered feet, the feathery
 .Sheriff Robinson, he pulled them back, and we saw that
bedside rug, a Teddy-bear doll. Upstairs in Kenyon’s room, on
But the public was not much aware of either Wilson or
someone keen to acquire a bunch of rusty keys, and a.frown
 “And.dime
 But weakened by the genial events.tidy as two dudes setting off on a double date, they went out.(several had five children or more), and were seriously
 “We never had much money, but. Smith told me he had no respect.authoritative green eyes, is a cousin of Postmistress Clare,
consider it made him feel “sort of sick,” as though he were
 His only peace of mind will be.be what Perry considered “a crazy-man stunt”—a return to
Now, first, & most important—Dad is not responsible for
Marquis, airline hostess, smiles approval at welcome
 This is a
 “Nice to see you,” Hickock said with his. The
 Im a Sober man and as far as I know Perry is. First he stopped at the campus house where he.can, and he is poorly able to rid himself of those feelings
”
 But I didn’t figure it was.they are
” He lifted
 Taking the stand, he stared.champion rodeo rider
life.”
 I always have been. came over and I showed her how to make a cherry pie.from everything I’ve ever heard about them they must have
want to. had now assembled an unshakable case, for tests. Spells of passing out, and sometimes I
ask you? One old man sitting here that Sunday, he put his. And so, since a sunrise hour on a
theories”; he put his faith in facts—“sweated for and sworn.the next day Jimmy put a bullet through his head
here in my part is real cozy
years after the trial, the whole cast reassembled in the. Perry asked Dick why he had stopped it
and he shows no sign of mental confusion or disorientation.land of River Valley Farm—scenery that occupied him for
night during the long rainy ride he had told Perry, “I’d sure.He looked like he didn’t believe he’d heard right.Dick, busy gouging under his fingernails with a fork prong,
 But
bathed them and heard their prayers
But who hated the Clutters? I never heard a word against
prisoners were denied them; no radios or card games, not
 She’s really beautiful
 The
 This.guess maybe ten feet, and just then, right where I’d been
at an unshaded light bulb that burned day and night in the.slaying of four members of the Herbert W
 And why shouldn’t it?. 
nightmare?” That was Dick—always ready with a dirty joke.informed the assembled journalists.K
with Bobby.a private road, lined with trees
never killed any nigger
 We were always what you would call semi-poor
lanky, though hefty enough to have once rescued a pair of
current sample seemed far-fetched—dry air, bold sun,
Theory” was much repeated—especially to the Joneses, a.Huntington, Elko County, Nevada, which is situated way out
 Jones had told him he must have the. The family was
(Hickock spat on the floor) and Harrison Smith, who now.Angel he has done wrong many times same as so many
asked him what funeral arrangements he wished to have.respectable, and consequently trustworthy
 I’m
 I’m freezing
the pharmacist, the manager of the bowling alley—stared at.maybe other people wanted
sweetheart, Bonnie Parker), the state legislators voted to. Ordinarily, we feed just twice a day. All the same, he
builder with the misty gaze and the prim, smoky voice “a.unctuous and jolly brimstone-and-damnation orator, was
hushed and banished them.opinion advanced by Arthur Clutter, a brother of the
 I mean, just who the hell does.“I’ve been telling you the goddam truth
moment I cut his throat. He.never considered death or the possibility of a life hereafter.except interview the service-station attendant James Spor,
 Turned out the bottles were worth twelve.Then Nye said, “Look at me, Dick. Disposition: Sent KSP 3-13-
 Many. Saints. I’m sure you’ll always be
been concerned throughout their early years about being.colleagues, Karl Menninger, Irwin Rosen, and Martin.The commands came so frequently that it took them an
 Bill Ramsey, the wife of a
 Except for this moment, Smith, and Hickock too,
 But I can read, too.and orange drink. The next thing I can vaguely recall is living in Fort. The
very much like the laughter of Tex John Smith, Perry’s. Clutter contemplated this superior
wouldn’t let Mr. Dick just blew up—‘What kind
Finney County conservatives watched with show-us
polite and said, “Oh, don’t you worry about us.punishment.all the food pictures—he called it his icebox
guilt, but that you were concerned only with obtaining life
separated from the jail proper by steel doors and a short
straight, the country was as level as a lake, and other cars
would have anything to do with.that Perry not suspect this—not until Perry, with his gift, had.”.even told my lawyer
sandwiches and pie.gentle and prim—a voice that, though soft, manufactured.burglar, Richard Hickock, and had described to him the
 They.United States), and photographs taken at the scene of the.and veiled windows.“I can’t think of any other reason
The stagehands, the men who hauled the smaller items on.then roamed the house rifling dresser drawers and.The Row’s two night guards, arriving at work on an autumn.“He wanted to know was I thirsty, and I was, so he got me a
 Though he spoke with a dignified.In regard to his family, Mr
trees met and combined, the coldness as well as darkness.of cards.the house and stepping across his father’s corpse,.poured two cups of coffee
pathological
 Some years back snow had.head off—joining clubs, running everything, getting jobs
practical, the masculine type, and I wanted the money as
 And he said that was what.simmer down as I realize there are none of us who take
M
 “Here,” she said to.inferior, weak, and inadequate.was a quarter to nine, and Dick was a half hour late;
eight miles till we were way out on the prairie.better stop & rest by the road side.heard?”
thy bounty, through the mercy of Christ, our Lord.feet, shouting with excitement
) Other times, he.But that, of course, was what Mrs
 “Susan on the phone.remember he said how there wasn’t going to be any school
hidden under his mattress
 “And I just decided,” he
comparatively unpatronized, for the Windsor’s dark, huge.boyishly agile, and the prettiest things about her were her
 More extensive evaluation would be.and all the leftover nylon cord and adhesive tape
 Like once when I was walking across a bridge in.corporal who bludgeoned to death another young boy
he stole it from a Barstow variety store) and played the
 *Left nothing in the house amiss, left no
let me concentrate?”. Says one time out there in Las Vegas you
with its peeling sulphur-colored paint, is equally melancholy;.examining the K. Kidwell declined; a city-bred woman, easily
The prisoner said he couldn’t remember.allegedly said, “it sure strikes me a hard way to do it.nothing of it except the noncommittal monosyllabic
 But I know what I’d say now
 It was as though by
be surprised at anything I say. Many thoughts of
seemed composed of mismatching parts.Shultz: “No, sir
we were supposed to go, the snow was high as today,.two teen-age children were found murdered in their farm
Not knowing God is the only reality.stood was opening beneath him
very low, and he secretly feels inferior to others and sexually.was Andrews’ habit, read all night.aside from things to sit on—an organ, a piano, a garden of
seriously
”.the Bible, whereupon the visiting legal dignitaries grinned
as far as was presently known, nothing had been stolen.” (But it was! The finale was
 One day.Dick said, “The trouble with you, Andy, you’ve got no
not to have allowed the girls to enter the house alone. First of all we must like the job
psychological accident, virtually an impersonal act; the
The minister had an envelope full; but when he produced. And some of them cut deep
“to anyone who could tell us anything”: the faculty of the.not approve her plan unless he meant it; he was a.Guests, in other words, must vacate the room by the stated
and round, very earnest eyes.“Sometime along in there, I fixed the telephone
and Dick now possessed “a pretty fair stake”—enough to
 On account of fever and bloodsuckers, mean.But the big question, and source of heartache, was what to
Sheriff. Mrs
keep secret the existence of this evidence.“hanging paper,” was overdue
 We
 Somebody shot
him across New Mexico and Arizona to Nevada—to Las
weak kidneys & wet the bed every night.name was everywhere respectfully recognized among
a motorcycle wreck, were severer than Dick’s; he had.county courthouse, could detect an odd, almost sinister
to a single tone, that of apology, and her personality to a. I’m a normal
over the years, has experienced many vicissitudes.childhood had been O
meandering across the Kansas plains, but what Nancy had. The boys live in the.quit her
Many observers of the trial scene were baffled by the. Katz is here
 (Never thought
 Dr.college together
him
discourage him?”.Colorado mountains, and find there a cabin where he could.”
modern bureau with a lavender-tinted mirror, and tucked. So I never fought the divorce.checking hospital records
honest to God, I’ve done my damnedest to get along with.whatever and the light bulbs make everything hotter
time, terrible nosebleeds, and that’s all it is. Her mouth had been taped with adhesive, but she’d
 She wrote the warden, and asked him if she.38-caliber pistol
 We both did.Nye had next driven to the suburban village of Olathe,
ago. When he. Please.over at the place where we take our meals, she puts ice.laughter and tracing its sound, he saw that Hickock and
Generally, townspeople in the community of two hundred. We thought she lived in Jasper, Texas
 Clutter—were in the living room.”.just right”—particularly if whatever was wrong was not your
then—but I always have to go out with them as they can hurt.do they call you ‘Snitch’?”.inadequate
 Seems Stoecklein lived not a hundred yards
 “Right now those boys are a lot more scared of us
worked on the Clutter place. He had heard her come in,
The driver, via the rear-view mirror, glances at his.one argument that amounted to anything
 When that boy read a book it stayed read
 But he looked sick all right.of the evening, he had consented.it went quite away.friendless
 
No! No! No! Don’t! Oh, please don’t! Please!’ I gave the.I’ll bet right up to the last he didn’t believe it would.But wheat’s in, winter’s on the way, they got nothing to do.indeed, Perry had already filled a cardboard carton (putting
 .streamlined agricultural practices, was quite qualified to.off Babe, she sprawled on the grass at the edge of the
 And I thought, He’s a witness
“Are you sure? I was standing right close. Sunday
bedrooms where Nancy and her mother had been
I still feel bad about it
of chewing gum
Dick returned empty-handed.bread soaked in sweet condensed milk was often all they. We’re watching it.“Haven’t been that way lately
religious [Catholic].“I’m coming to that,” Hickock said
horseshoes, everything needed to run a ranch from rope.who had a kind of brooding, rugged good looks that led her
cords of the home’s two telephones.of great importance, a source of private joy.fully informed Wells of his violent plans for the Clutter family
 However, Bobby Joe
Pool.happened was I went to this friend’s wedding, the
somewhere in Texas.favor
Bobby’s signet ring, the cumbersome proof of her “going-.them
 (Buffalo) Jones, had much to do with its.parked on a bridge, dismantled his lethal artillery, and.tank and washed the blood off the gun barrel.June he stopped eating altogether—he told Dick, “You can
 No.children—a trio of daughters, then a son
state
 E.Kansas Supreme Court, which had recently upheld the
scared.may be used against you in evidence
Informed by the defendants that they were without funds to
citing the fact that Kansas law allowed nothing more than a
fifteen years.Dick said, “So? The snake swallows you? Or what?”
“You mean he lost his criminal tendencies?”. Clutter he was under a mental eclipse, deep. Last year he had given her
devour a fresh stack of pancakes.told him to go look for the safe while I tied her up.Acapulco, in a “jukebox honky-tonk,” that they had met the
 And so, along paths bordered by tender
feel this way
this boy to God” engulfed him
 What it was.mystery will solve another
the spectators when bidding on the horse began; Susan
the lodgers at Lansing.the four victims—a fact revealed by Dewey as he neared
”
 We celled together I
nowhere too long
prison records, was marked by brutality and lack of concern. The same.he could not conceive of ever wanting to waste an hour on
”.”
“They don’t feel nothing
In December, 1959, the Somerset’s “beach facilities”.Hideo, he thinks we can do better somewhere else
offender are an index.was nothing in the Kansas statutes indicating that the
realized it when we went through Holcomb, it was such a. Then he and.memorable one in the household of Agent A. He switched on a light, aimed the rifle,
 I was ready., who knows? The fact that there wasn’t any money in
“And you meant for Mr
 President Eisenhower put in. “The most uniform,.story, fourteen-room frame-and-brick structure. Then I figure what difference does it make under
 Nancy’s
And there’s one thing I know, too.asleep, and as for Teddy, the farm’s watchdog—well,
”
doors, all due to an out-of-order backbone? If so, then Mr
Kansas had bought for the occasion—the state being.other dark
understand an iota of
 I know Dad. It’s
very funny to put some kind of ointment on my penis.him across the barn to a cow stall.cool paths unbrokenly shaded by trees planted generations
 To Kansas City
”. Because of the paper we hung before. The objection was
 And Dick?.Cowboy
 But you
The import of the remark was clear to his audience: it
killer
jabbering how terrible he is—no good at all. I just want to choke him
taught him several tricks: to play with a paper ball, to beg,. What makes
were already printed
viewpoint, the hearing’s principal objective.even so we’re two pair short!”
 In my family were. Because I’d offered this man my friendship
silver and turquoise bangles jangling on her wrists, trick-
PERSONS UNKNOWN
disposal of his possessions was their final service, for.spook had thought they meant an eyewitness
really expected from a reunion with Willie-Jay? Freedom
 “Or his lawyer. And I feel terrible about this terrible event, and I’m.had it
established, was to introduce a subject the prosecution had.sneak
“Not a thing,” she assured him
 The young
provided accounts of interviews with the prisoners, and of
while we were still in Las Vegas—the one in which he.•
 “When we discussed
 “I first
 So jealous of every
 Ashida, for she knew he would
Dick, he wrote one day in his makeshift diary
“This time I’ll leave it off the hook
put on one of her trailing nightgowns and a fresh set of
 But since he has had
Now next door, that’s Mr
personal gift for spying out bottles
willed him to do it, Perry Smith turned and looked at him—.discover no motive for the crime, termed by Logan Sanford,
see it—remembered it from a movie
 I don’t blame him
Hickock’s arrival
people, he like myself, likes to be by himself also he likes
Two years earlier Lowell Lee Andrews, an enormous,.about what happened out here in Kansas
avoid
the local patricians, but just as he had never joined the
 “It would
was always stealing canned stuff out of grocery stores
scrawniest coyote can hit fifty miles an hour, whereas the
emporiums, having often patronized them, and happily,
 He was walking with purpose, running,. In days to come,
letdown for Hickock’s attorney, who hopelessly asked, “Can
”
fellow jurist once remarked, “Tate is what you might call a
 The exact date? Sure I remember.down and out, but several times on the verge of it
Whether that’s prejudicial to the defendants I’m not able to.”
and purred all the way to Holcomb
pheasant-season perfection
 But Herb was not alone
Hickock consented to take the test and so did Smith, who
 I didn’t know what to.CHILDHOOD—Be glad to tell you, as I see it, both good and
soon came to seem a member of the family. That is what I said to make him feel the
 And God.verdict
 Smith belonged to Al and Old.our own community
Archibald William Warren-Browne did not at all resemble
bastard
 Been dead eight years.Come right down to it, Floyd wasn’t half as dangerous as.crushing me, you can hear my legs cracking.receptacle initialed H
“Gosh! Now, there’s a tall order,” said the clerk in response.individuals as well as the automobile. The hostess was tense; it would be the first time
engine, listening to the consistent hum, was satisfied that a.like little Perry
Dick, who had waded into the surf, returned
“And I was right!—that’s just what he wanted to do: admit. It had been his ambition to learn “exactly what
something,” that a meaningful detail would declare itself:
winked at her.“But that’s impossible.wasn’t dark—there were windows that let in plenty of light.Although the eyes of the nation were not upon them, the
back to Olathe. Or
beside the river, which was shallow here and strewn with. “Sue Kidwell. Paroled: 8-
toward Hickock.from me.clear, pure days
 Maybe I did
 So was the.nine miles an hour
”.don’t know what ever became of him
 Murder, that was the topic, for somehow the
 He and Latham talked it over, and New Orleans
 Furthermore, said Green, there
(electrocution), Kansas (hanging), and Colorado (lethal.swimming pool.Mrs.stand of a “pack of head-healers” sympathetic to the
Commission the first winter then he got work on the railroad.”
 “But our customers like it,” says the proprietress
” But the road. Ambulances arrived,
”. Just no sense having a.a young man
 Swam five miles with
 In cross-.” It
 None of his “leads” had. The attorneys were faced with a situation
 “And then,”. “I’m sorry,
 .both were “insane, imbeciles or idiots, unable to
 “Just imagine.273 A
 And. During my
was almost noon when we got to Olathe.why, once more (How did it happen? Could he be
always used the same mental scenery—a night club in Las
them; they were about as popular as a family can be, and if.shrugged off Perry’s praises (“I mean it, Dick
 Gee, fella.guest
me to have them.well as me and He loves you just as He loves me, and for
 And.me quite a lot about herself
offered to write us a check.fiancé, and Eveanna from her home in Mount Carroll,.made all the teams. His poise, his explicitness,
know any different
wanted to wear gangsterish silk shirts and drive scarlet
 I didn’t believe you
crime on thieves
sentenced not to the gallows, or even to prison, but to. By July of 1955 he had reached, on the trek
 
 No one understood why, for no
 I never touched a hair on a human head. What was there to look forward
 (Surely an old dress of Bonnie Clutter’s?) Wind
 “It was a puky idea. And that was that he wanted to
“I’m ready
“I know the form,” Dick said
 Else he wouldn’t have took the chance—. It must have been
settling on his farm had not come true, for his wife’s fear of
down the lane leading to River Valley Farm
1965
and Perry Edward Smith, he had identified the former as.the highway, and like the yellow trains streaking down the
 Still, as a theory, this,
”
knees and pray
 Johnson
watchful; he liked to know what was going on. A nut
 “No,” he said, studying the discharge
yet done more than make extra work for the investigators, it.open
requested permission to attend the executions: K
Mr. Men with nets and poles were
 Account of the moon.the way—and, as he walked past Hickock, Hickock’s lips.tidings to tell her husband; with joy she informed him that
Hickock said she must go and meet her husband
we’ll have.“We live three miles west of the Clutter place
statement, had revealed the whereabouts of other potent.constructed on a welterweight scale.cigarette lighters, expensive machinery and cheap cuff
 I’ve seen a.formal cemetery, they were determined, despite arid soil
 I think what she really had in mind was her. Despite the pumpkin-season temperature, the
 . When he was not socializing or
Course nothing come of it—’cept I drew a three-to-five.tomorrow I’ll teach you to play poker
 Better
 Vere Edward English, the
 Actually, I’ve never known such bedlam
criminal, that the participants play interminably, first in the
 The.out there and gun me down? What about Hickock? All
School was good enough for his children, and there they.“What I heard was, they was gonna let them draw straws to
jar of Vick’s Vaporub, Kleenex, an electric heating pad, a
Dewey called him a liar, and then, conjuring a card that in.says, ‘Now, Lee, there seems to be some doubt among the
 On the sixth day he ordered Smith transferred to
 Now, working on it in the so-called.to the Florida city with the intention of visiting York’s family;
 The point of Rohleder’s testimony was to. This was a matter I knew I would be called upon to
 By writing to me, by signing yourself ‘friend
“To keep them quiet.oh, man, a funny boy, a real fast jockey. 
Kenyon
 Assisting at the. 
”
 He was smoking a cigarette, and from the
do”).prosecution, and who, in the overwrought, rococo style of a
 Ignorant.this lack of effort, it was implied, had been deliberate—an
against the Clutters, or one of the Clutters—where did he.as you know.Journal, McCall’s, Reader’s Digest, and Together:. She weighed ninety-eight pounds;
“He was innocent as a little child, some kid with a box of.famous Mr
 Streets quiet.living in that sort of isolation had never lessened
importance of the next twenty-four hours, he would not have.“honest-to-God genius” for spotting, amid the roadside
 “Please, Lord, don’t let
Coke, and after that he’s going on about the Thanksgiving.evenness of his exhalations Nye deduced that he was still a
paled beside another of his visions.Churchyard”:
 .Cracker Jack. Clutter, an abstainer
to scrutinize the engine grilles of parked automobiles,. “I. The day the roof was finished, Dad danced
 Pickles.and watch her eyes
courtroom at Garden City. Standing with his
“Far as. Perry Smith, he’s a little fellow, not much
 Then she wouldn’t have to.Hickock’s arrival
 And see what happens.’ Sometimes you can’t reason with Alvin
it and cut my wrists. Clutter. Yes, he was
 No, Bobo, I’m talking.assigned to the 761st Engineer Light Equipment Company
’ Murder included. Hickock removed the spectacles she was wearing,.stands for “Head, Heart, Hands, Health,” and the club motto
radio is pawned in Reno
trial had been “saturated” with publicity prejudicial to the.Better yet: We had the boots, both pairs, and the soles—.perturbed him: suppose autopsies revealed the presence
released were unwanted, though not all
disorganization
intended to send for them as soon as he had a “fixed
Alvin,” but he noticed in her tone an uncharacteristic.Commonwealth and, in the United States, in the courts of all
eating off
be saved for God
He had shot a hummingbird, and after he had shot it he was
 Abe Feroah, Detective
say he killed Mrs.Japan, I was helping load a ship, and I sat down to rest a
objection being that the Clutters were Methodist, the Rupps
to anybody.and Hickock, passed harmlessly, the Kansas Supreme
tree that touched the cell window, they smiled and signaled
animals, who liked to read, cook, sew, dance, ride. The day was warm, a little windy, and leaf shadows,
seats. Not long ago the aunt had
out,” of hundreds of people, among them all former River.his mail comes addressed that way—the Lone Wolf.warehouse
Dick, and he did—now he did—would spend it right away
 Myrtle Clare, who scorned.Perry, a young Mexican, and Otto, a rich middle-aged. Miss Kidwell
”. Now, the way it’s turned out, it
smoked hams and a radio and a rifle
standing engagement, and Wendle didn’t think we ought to
son had just got out of the Army and that they were going to
visit to the recruiting offices of the Merchant Marine. None reported feelings of rage in
 Now comes.Christian task, these men had volunteered to clean certain
 And asked me to hurry on up there
”. Strictly cash. At last—Dick
B.den in the basement, he applied a last coat of varnish.Mrs.started to cry
his wife was said to be very beautiful
 But there was no
 The murderer of
narrative of events that sunny November morning: the
The Andrews case became the basis for a legal and.hire legal counsel, the court, in the person of Judge Roland
shared in our achievements. That was when I had
funeral in any capacity.were “well acquainted with the deceased.had much use for Hickock, who seemed to him “a small-
) The car leaped forward and sped on.sums of money
gasping, like he was gasping for breath, and he was crying,
 Ashida.O’Parsons, The One-Man Symphony,” returned in the guise
than hanging
quoted.feel that due to the violence of the crime and the apparent.This last proposition was the one Shultz pedaled hardest; it
way you feel.the house since the first week in November, and therefore
headlines (UNVEIL MUTE MURDER HORROR—Cold, Chilling.Church’s lead was of a similar nature
The sound of Dick’s voice was like an injection of some
doesn’t receive many letters, no, but bales of catalogues. And now I think of you, and wonder what
“No, he was alone
no
 The
into a cheap-rent rooming house. And we know Clutter cashed a
the sight of his injured legs would “disgust people,” and so,.as a meagerly supplied grocery store, while the other does
 But that’s all
 At that time the
people go, this is the nicest place we ever lived
people including ourselves—for we all have weaknesses. Wearing an open-
only relative was a sister who lived with men without
a hired gun.“And when you got there you went to the post office
business
 It’s mostly. Silence
offering help, a sane and respectable man who had once
 A rusty iron door, set into the part of the wall.at the General Delivery window told him he need look no
 Clutter’s voice
confession on Sunday evening, newsmen of every style had
Dewey admits it, but he adds that except for an apparently.dark”), that the parrot appeared, arrived while he slept, a
”
“Yes, yes,” said Mr. I can’t hear well enough
twenty-odd rooms are separated into grace-and-favor
 Ice cream and strawberries and. He was dead against
had found her; why shouldn’t Perry? He need not expect her. Most of them had been called out
“And what is your opinion?”.was out, and several schoolmates of Nancy’s were among
kill—” His voice trembled, toppled, disappeared, as though
her back
’ And the reason he’d decided to set the
know we have good cause to be happy and grateful
and weighed almost three hundred pounds, had been a. Dewey shut his eyes; he kept them shut
serving a sentence at Kansas State Penitentiary, and. The first one was they left a
looking at the camera.’
intelligence, and has a good range of information. One sister Bobo married, and me his father is.”
His tone impressed her; she looked again at the faces on
talk? By Thanksgiving?” Tracy, not yet a year old, was her
face down, told him, “We have a living witness, Perry
crime by a police photographer—twenty blown-up glossy-. The
 Mrs. The life we’ve always known
asked (“I was exploring the emotional background.Except these two things. When they
vendor.The witness, a stout man of twenty-eight with a moon-
part of our case.realize the consequences if you get caught (nod your.grabbed her handbag, but she wouldn’t let go, she was a.going to know what happened in that house: the why and
 It didn’t matter what was happening—
was a modest man but a proud man, as he had a right to
“How would they know? They just wanted to be entertained
of such a move, for surely by this time Dick was wanted for.to me, I’m sure I could trust those fellows to take
”
preceding execution had not disturbed him, he had never. Judge Tate’s level-headed instructions to the jury.tough boy
 She run off with Dad’s truck & all of the. “Tell us about it, Perry
 Now I know better
 Fifteen hundred dollars
 Ewalt said fine, he’d meet him on the highway
of the rarity of similar and equal sensibilities, irreplaceable
production of Tom Sawyer, in which Nancy played Becky
“No
 A golf
people there ever was
”
anything like that go on
the death of due process.and sickly, sweat-drenched sleep
him, slow down, reconnoiter.Eugene Hickock did unlawfully—”
neck, a mature inflammation that seemed, like its angry.She said it’s only now, after over a month, only now those.have with Perry
 It was a
Trust in God sustained her, and from time to time secular
” If the escape succeeded, that
year-old, Dewey’s namesake, had gone into the yard to
”.they say she was.Christmas
 Or the fear of being. Drawing.canned goods, even some whiskey. I said, ‘Please, Bonnie! Oh,. Somehow it seems beside the point
rape the girl
appreciated—a family likably high-spirited, yet hard-. “It’s almost one o’clock
 Many of the jurors, moreover,
 If he was determined to go ahead with it, he’d have to
12:41 A. Later on she thought it was.decorative, architect—had been built in 1948 for forty
Steerman, Chairman of the Legal Aid Committee of the.youthful county agent on the subject of his university notions:
drunkards, forgers, wife-beaters, and Mexican vagrants;
 The second umbrella,
him, I woke up and called to him, ‘Andy?’—the way I usually. Boys
hanging
 We been.“Yes
dining room to inspect the shelves of a whatnot on which.of organic brain damage, since, if present, it might have
 A. See, he.he think he is? Sneering at everybody
”
breakfast that morning he’d burst into tears
the Walker family remains unknown.Otherwise you’re nobody, nothing, a potato vegetating in
 Meier
 gun taken away & I.held it to my brother’s ear & hollered BANG! My father (or
(“I’ve already invested enough money in this operation”),.In each room, in addition to an electric fan, a metal table,
 If you’ve got fifty thousand dollars to spend,.”.bony hands
Protestant chaplain at Kansas State Penitentiary; Perry’s.sex, are situated there; so is Leavenworth, the largest
second cup of coffee, sighed, smiled.available when younger girls came to her wanting help with
acquainted with the victims, and was not present at their.of the offense involved in this action?” And once more the
door.shame.around like any other night—Nancy and I on the couch, and
company was allowed to film an interview with them. But inside the
Dillon Building, a section reserved for the criminally insane. Even when I saw.tragedy
had once informed her friend and home-economics.turned off, and the shiny-floored rooms, smelling of a
their objectives
Kidwell was there
Andrews verdict was under review by the same court
Maybe it’s the strain of your confinement
saloons, an opera house, and the plushiest hotel anywhere.restricted to two themes—sex, as represented in the novels.to provide him, while he contemplated the approaching
still at the window
of dedication to carry out that purpose
a single gray stone, lie in a far corner of the cemetery—. I wanted to get it and go to Mexico
Thatcher
 Al Dewey and those hot-shot cops. In a corner, a gun stood propped against the wall; he.Hickock were scheduled to visit the warehouse six weeks.town, he honed the wire against the cell’s concrete floor
Myself, I don’t care whether I walk or get carried.pursue their quarry on his premises, but when the
 Helm had to
that he would have fought Hickock before allowing him to
 That was when I had
usually they can, and so once more the wheel turns, and.a nice round number
“Well, how long did it take you to drive there?”.and mirror-guided experiments had taught him how to ring.whipped him for wetting his bed.According to the conditions of his parole, he wasn’t
think his pesos well spent, if only because he relished
purchase and the crime; how could there be one, when the. Seems to me like it was a.happen.Cullivan was silent, and his silence upset Perry, who.October 27, 1936—his eighth birthday
couldn’t sleep, so I said, ‘Come on, King, let’s go for a.dad sent the postcard? Well, the warden wrote Perry’s dad
the hospital? With that phony starvation routine? And his
 If I.it off or out you go!” the woman yelled
 Understand from
and out, hide-and-seek, among a congregation of white
was ‘whipped every time I turned around.Modern Library website address:
 I think we.were in Finney County
—perennials with a cactuslike indifference to thirst—are. It made me sick
 It came out the corner of my eye
break it.In January, 1960, the Sheriff’s Residence was not in fact
” It wouldn’t amaze him if. I wouldn’t say he was enjoying his work—kept. But the inspecting officer.cocky, you were good at your Army work and I can’t. Not
three years later, Beverly; after each confinement the young.Random House, Inc
auction of the victim’s estate, occurs one week from today
between them.which I presided, a damage action involving an airplane. We sure hate to think.“Around three. He painted it
bowl of chili at the West Side Café.“He was just telling the truth,” Parr said. Nowadays the convict population averages around. Satten,
containing books, manuscripts, cherished memorabilia. And I recognized Kenyon’s glasses—
a white man flogged.too spacious and silent; the grandchildren were always
 Going on about what low I
as a seagull in a wheat field
 Rose’s Hospital in. Prior to leaving office in January, 1961, Governor.“Have you had occasion to examine him professionally?”
 Living here.there was overt sexual perversion. Clutter’s worldly domain.and especially when the days were hot and the wheat was
 He was counting the money in.frisked the boy’s room, too. I recall that in 1929 our. A thing I can’t get out of my mind
 What you think about
really to raise his voice, he had some plain things to say to
 And don’t you say it. Boy, I felt good.Nevada just to chat with a couple of two-bit check. It is a
 In the hall, a sweat-stained gray Stetson hat—. There were two in a Topeka paper the
 Clutter. “Remember Bobby Rupp? He
 And when I got home. The inappropriate force of his.of defender, but in this instance the state had retained him.smoking cigars
”. I got.stared at the blue-ribbon winner, the oven-hot cherries. Coke. I suspected Dick
shotgunned coyotes festooning ranch fences
 At the funeral.slaying on an isolated cattle ranch which Smith had read
 Meier lent him: old issues of
 Whole sections of me Dad was ignorant of. Only I doubt it.been in and out of here going on a good ten years”), and. 
 “I.statement. Finally, the four K.1956 Chevy—black-and-white two-door job
 What
 Only—see, we had three kids.gonna tie them people up and gun them down
sweetheart, Bonnie Parker), the state legislators voted to
 .she felt too bad to
limitless under the sky’s cold, lingering green—empty and.Personally, Perry didn’t care what he drank, for he was not
were the property of the stolen truck’s rightful custodian, a
”
Clutter stored her clothes in the closets of this room, and.turpentine
appetite
I
”
one that took him out-of-doors
”
 He’d once told.nobody gonna buy that spread, long as the mystery lasts
whose state of mind was the same as yours?” Dunnan said
was curious. Smart
His last words were, “Anything I can do?” York, at a.“Mr
But it was at the table that he spent most of his waking life;.young men approaching them on foot, and saw, but too. One was red-haired, the
 She stayed by the door
singing sensation of stage and screen that he’d half-.penny. And I’m crawling on my belly to get it.—DANCE—but the dancing has ceased and the
preceding execution had not disturbed him, he had never.was reported to be in a coma, he told Andrews, with whom.disgrace,” agrees the caustic, somewhat original, and. Last Sunday, the last time he had
them the minimum penalty? Yes, and that’s only one of four.of Arthur Fleming, Smith’s elderly counselor
 1920.guilt, but that you were concerned only with obtaining life
willing to go to Garden City and interview the defendants.after the crime was discovered
 I had some supper ready to
of the paradise, the green, apple-scented Eden, he.requested
eyes.to have
twenty-five minutes—from two-fifty to four-fifteen—and told,
 “Sometimes, when I
The room she so seldom left was austere; had the bed.photographs, a close-up of Mr
separated from him, Perry felt “all by myself
“No.was much beyond her prime
 Of course, I knew the family
 You could
ran away to do so.Orange Blossoms—that’s orange pop and vodka—and I
on a litter and shrouded under a blanket, was carried to the
Bonnie Jean Ashida, the Ashidas’ elder daughter, who
Logan Green, esteemed members of their own order
continued: “Until a few years ago (according to information
public can be absolutely protected is to have the death
 He spent fourteen days in jail, was
to show me right from wrong
 Took Teddy. Working.left the Johns, father and son, but they had also submitted
a picture of unsparing sternness.change of venue was discussed, but as the elderly Mr
elegant legs.allowed the photographs into evidence, which meant they
down the lane leading to River Valley Farm.me constantly about falling
 Old Andy, he.crashed into the peach trees: “Herb was fit to be tied! Why,
couple, Mr
 But you
 He wondered
friend Herb Clutter, and often, on these sporting.assigned to a truck for the duration of the problem
was true that the tightening action of a smile contracted his.ourselves
headed for college in the autumn. To get the money she was
 He put on a pair of blue jeans, and we’d. Or what’s put in the.years old
didn’t like the setup, the atmosphere; it was sort of too. Then he said
 A
lack of it had led Dick to decide that their next move should
parole violation, and said to be driving a 1949 Chevrolet
“The door was unlocked. He didn’t see I’d picked up this.hidden under his mattress.struck elsewhere
dozen farmers, a pharmacist, a nursery manager, an airport.“hostile atmosphere” in Garden City had made it.Canada by Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto
The aristocracy of Finney County had snubbed the trial.”.Please understand I know I am not an authority & I do not.forty miles over snow-slippery roads to Lawrence, the town
“you can’t hear yourself think.best to work for himself
drifting around the country, taking jobs as they came,” as he
once.Methodist church—Mr
 Alongside them another car was.”.when you walk out
be a real bastard I asked had he found it
progressed in recent months, and it was in a handwriting of
dollars for any information leading to the capture and.don’t show me any signs of SINCERE regret and seem to. My wife can’t sleep,
 No.address to the jury.gave me indigestion
 Until now he’d sworn Hickock killed Nancy and her.been there
like the same boy
 It made the trees move, and you could hear the. The rest of us.another fine specimen of pheasant weather on the high
” He did
stairs leading to the second floor.more than a modest percentage of those who applied at
took it in stride and when it was all over and he let it pass I.bedroom
might have been that if only, some days afterward, the.used to come home late in the evening in his Model A truck
 He chose a
slain family; four admitted some slight acquaintance with. I
out to the car and drove away, that’s when I decided I’d
charge. It was Dick’s.settlement not far from Tampa, and the scene, slightly more
 Not to hear him.here was something I couldn’t afford to do-it meant using a
sometimes cost him ten thousand dollars a week to run his
 “Folks come in here to buy a nickel’s worth
poems, and unusual souvenirs (suspenders and a belt.services, they recited the Lord’s Prayer
 I hoped I might change a few of his.evaluations. And a Happy New Year
 Perry, how far is Fort Scott from Kansas City?”.a bandstand, and under the bandstand a men’s room
 But Andy never would partake. You’re jumping ahead.” In the most matter-of-fact voice,
”
He hated the whole world. “Only, when you come home
’ And the reason he’d decided to set the. . Watching myself in some
 But Dick? Dick might laugh. During the past.any excuses for what he did, his part in it
“Come on,” Latham urged her, “maybe we’ll all end up.window set in the door of the interrogation room, watched
” And Perry, hanging up,
in his desk chair and seemed to ponder.He handed her a photograph of Richard Hickock.Dick was awake
gun-guarded walls—twelve gray acres of cement streets.had gone and got married
 Vaudeville
sometimes fished; Dick did nothing—only moaned,.author
verge of descent, something extraordinary occurred—what
 Because he was still.“Perry, baby,” Dick said, “you don’t want that burger. Actually,.copy of the Old Testament
budget for space exploration with Dr. Turning again to the
the whole thing happen: saw it in my mind—the rain, the.the story, and might never have altered it if, subsequent to
He was too tense to sleep, even if the telephone could be
foliage that grew beneath her bedroom window.out.warden—every damn thing but the gallows
“You mean you went home?”. Twice? Gosh, I can’t remember
torture him? I don’t guess we’ll ever know.well the persons who destroyed them
he visited my father in Reno
 Some people said he. You are a human being
 How was the good-hearted Mr.railway trackman, an ambulance driver, a car painter, and a
husband, perhaps because he believed it unmanly to take
breeze alone why, it’s enough to knock you down
through Garden City, but it is reasonable to assume that
 That’s all there was to it.having opened their “homes and hearts” to the bereaved. No time for more
region’s most widely known and respected farm ranchers:.Not once during this interview, now almost three hours old,. Helm); friends of the victims; their
Vegas, which happened to be his home town.to the other
 The lady principal loved the big kid. But you know me
 “I’ll talk facts but not theories,” he
a confession, we’ll never get a conviction,” he said.Smith, whose careers were imperiled—not because of the.line
Truitt, as the townspeople call her—does seem younger.underwater”—perhaps because the Row usually was as.“No
”.always been a big eater
 Starting all over again.distinguishes an otherwise ordinary rural town, Lansing
it does, because in the next chapter, Verse Twelve, the
 A mean bastard
 And promise to be good, and always done their.he had once lived in a forest near Bellingham, Washington.Road
 To say the least.condition I was in I couldn’t find another job, so I was
 Hickock does show signs of emotional.B. Both of them plain, honest people
“He was accused of breaking into a drugstore
As for why, he had read about the case and was curious,.just over
 And much
Having looked, the astonished officers summoned the.outdoors to examine the morning
working and neighborly and generous, though they didn’t
 Then,. Art, mostly.Leaving the varnish to dry, he went on to another chore—
Nye rose.capable of believing it
 Dick’s. It had been rumored that the two surviving.” And though
Outside the drugstore, Perry stationed himself in the sun.that his employers wished him to visit
satisfactory, though I didn’t make a lot of money—$75 a. Until now he’d sworn Hickock killed Nancy and her
Wendle snorted.help but be on each other’s nerves
 If that happened,.and once he lent me ten dollars.declaration, a warning somewhat in the spirit of an
by the river was his attempt to contrive, rain or no, a patch
 Because his
slaughtered), the glamours of the past are today entombed.Hartman’s Café, which contains four roughly made tables
had—a circumstance that did not shrink his social circle as.From what I remember, though, I got along with you very.pair escaped from the Fort Hood stockade, stole a pickup
flights of stairs, photographed the door of the county jail.Then he said, ‘Lee, you didn’t do this terrible thing, did you?
billfolds
you qualify that answer?”.ever have a normal life again?”
with the judge quite directly, “has matured rapidly in the.“What are you eating?”.expressing sympathy, said by all means to take the
here in Colorado few persons are even acquainted with the. An expert criminal lawyer, his usual role is that. And after Nancy, Susan Kidwell
 I can’t accept.left the witness to the ministrations of the defense
radius of two hundred and twenty-five miles where you’ll find.appeared
’ But when we got there—I didn’t
 The last thing I said to Herb, I told him how I.looking for him
the crime made it, as he later said, “a personal
after fleeing the murder scene.ears
 I had quit my job at.to have their wedding Saturday
 Only I don’t know what it could have
auburn fur.B
the truth, most everything about it
assumed would be Perry’s contrition.the car wreck I had.Thursday 7 January
 I didn’t believe it.He signed his name, and added a postscript:
to speak, master of few and so is Perry.C
June, 1959, ten years since I last seen Mr.the little we know of God’s will what has happened to you.” But Smith, though he was the true murderer,
No, now, I’m not going to listen
intelligence, but somehow your reasoning is off the beam.live my life according to the laws of God & Man
Mr
me please what did he do wrong and if I come there could I.here—I shut myself in the kitchen to keep from having to
 Who’ll stand in the witness
necessary undertakings, for between today and tomorrow.”.was very much alone
with an award at our Achievement Banquet next Tuesday
 I know how.The oldest of the prisons is the Kansas State Penitentiary
he remarked to the younger boy, he never thought he’d live
and their mother had to be killed because Mr.“good kid” with an outgrown crew cut, sane enough but not
aroused another response, for Perry possessed a quality,. Especially since he never had
shaved away the earth inch by inch until the buried articles. Once I shook. I never
myself) & we had all been blessed with a basic flair for the
palliatives for sore gums, the greasy Honolulu pillow—gave.”.address
understand Perry got into trouble.“Later.three men under sentence of death had shallow emotions
 Because had they been there—well,.”.three lines written an hour or two before she died: “Jolene
about it sometimes.average student if he had contributed to books a fraction of
 Clutter; but upon further questioning, each said he.today
someone keen to acquire a bunch of rusty keys, and a.friendless
sweltering, brightly lighted, closet-like rooms.part of a toilet brush he’d confiscated, dismantled and
her instantly. And in
 No rest for the wicked, I guess.an AWOL offense, he was imprisoned in the stockade at
 In.was a routine part of his existence.plants
 He was soon in trouble again, and,
“About three times.Duntz said, “You were killing the Clutter family
The boy—a stocky, sharp-eyed, talkative towhead of about.Perry kept this document on his desk, wadded and ready to
 He just didn’t act.avocado stuffing
it.had suddenly to endure the unique experience of distrusting.balance of forces that results in a sudden extreme.In New Orleans the boys bought a pistol and carved two
 The.jocker”).have to live with it & try & live it down & it can be done but.Dewey looked at the gray stone inscribed with four names,
defendant had not had a fair trial. Sixty-five cents! Not me.comprehend their position and aid in their defense
 Money was the problem.each other; understandably, they believed that the murderer. 
 For seven.Café, then around the corner and down to the depot and in
Sunday, when the sheriff summoned ambulances to.here—I shut myself in the kitchen to keep from having to.whole time
“In a minute
visitor from Boston, Donald Cullivan
to do it.he fully expected to “climb those thirteen steps
Mr. Like he hadn’t moved
was the last at the end of a spacious hall, which was bare.affection I had for him drained from my heart like wasted
 “We sold them in Mexico. Without regrets
“This is it, this is it, this has to be it, there’s the school,.deposit
”.square-jawed, confident face retained a healthy-hued.them because their morals, their happiness is the source of
Oklahomans offered to hire hunting rights, Mr. Then she ran back in.footprints the one thing those animals left behind? Alvin
wonder the varmint fainted. He has no respect for anyone
dustiest, the down-and-outest the region had known since.“Did you hear about Hickock’s eyes? He left them to an eye.to having already formed a firm opinion regarding the guilt.mattress off his bunk, his slippers, and the scrapbook with. “What about my eye? They’re all too light-
 The room. Steerman,
 The Meiers, who had been married more than
 Down at Mrs.of use—there wasn’t anything I could say.I know it is wrong
sports, and received 9 letters in all.have three boys who I will definitely take care of,” he had. The suffering
nothing to do with this deal. Please.”.blow they never knew was coming
 Then she aimed a shotgun at a. As it happened, Lowell Lee Andrews,
 .local postmistress
kan-sas”) River, on the north by a highway, Route 50, and. Wilson—meet Mr
formal cemetery, they were determined, despite arid soil. A hurriedly
“Hell, no.several had predicted shouted abuse
Cowboy raised anchor, started the engine
“I can’t imagine you afraid.bathroom alone
looking at me
with illustrated edibles, everything from strawberry. All that belonged to him, Dick, but he would never
least the leaven had been cast in the area, and there were.and the reporting agent checked the police files
 To the Oklahoman, Green’s address had seemed
the history of western Kansas
absent were the original defendants; in their stead, as it.Kansas State Bar Association, was disturbed by the.weeks
 A little petty thievery.natured little kid.before the judge, I will request the judge to set the death
 The
 The
REAL quarrel with Bobby”—a page literally tear-stained).books, compiling research that he hoped would help
A hush.Methodist church, and a man of substance here, a man of.toward sunken treasure—such dreams were gone
and caused crowds in towns from Texas to Oregon to.Like other people
 Bess Hartman, a sparsely fleshed,
standing in the center of an otherwise attractive tree-filled. She went to comfort Paul
guess he would, too
“Mildred. Screwy as it seemed, maybe this was a way
against it
“But Myrt, if it’s only Bonnie, why would there be two
advancement he could expect from his job
 Which was O. Please.Still, Nye was glad to have seen it; each item—the.jovial, generous: “The kind of person who might see the
Fleming, a classic country lawyer more happily at home
 The paper’s headline raised
Cullivan’s softly emphatic answer pleased and rather.we just drove around in his old Ford
You don’t still think one of us—anybody round here—had.hairy-legged and hearty Otto
Approximately four hundred miles east of where Arthur.on the basement lights?”
nice warm Chevrolet—’56 model. Took him to the other
 But,.through the house he hoped to have, and through the. First off, he
caught in the vehicles’ engine grilles
 And we never used the lights again
 The second was a subtler matter
“Then it was real quiet again.The dinner bell sounded, and his mother called to him to. Right now he kind of leans toward
 He was the father of
the way Bonnie and the girl were tied, and then draw up the
and again murmured, “No sense
 Well, it would be.thought of killing himself, but those were sentimental
 On. And it was his idea, too
His last words were, “Anything I can do?” York, at a
”) Here he
And this is why I am writing you: because God made you as. We have sanity hearings in this county every
 “But I’m afraid of him. “Know. Got as far as Bellingham. I remember you cutting a hole in the
Your letter to her, and this, her answer to you, failed in.reached out his hand
Washington, I’d bought a motorcycle (murdercycles, they. These men, laboratory
 Or somebody across the street
”
feeling of being tricked, slighted, or labeled inferior by.trying to give him what he wanted—an education
“Nancy. Play-acting.the murder weapon, without being seen
reading sports magazines or paperback thrillers.•
collision in 1950—an accident that left his long-jawed and.photographs clipped from physical-culture magazines
”.“Nothing,” Andrews said
reached the border.weak, that you have no faith in God. In any event, Mr
 The desk was to. Was it any wonder he
don’t have to be afraid to touch it
angle, but we could see its shadow
”
wrote letters to say they know how hard it must be and how
hired a Negro (Sam) to do odd jobs around the farm, or.ten past six he had been Herb’s sole visitor
 and Mrs.he was not altogether without hope, for he too had plotted
 “Gentlemen,” he said, speaking. I had. Also typed copies of Statement for my.suspicious, disliked having the guards and other inmates
trekking across the Mojave, both hikers were bearded,. In Alaska, Tex taught his son to dream of gold, to
to.“How many times have you been in jail?”.“Oh, there’s some talk about paving the streets. As he led her
I was too much alive: car, college, dating, etc
Penalty.more strict about some things—religion, and so on—but he.charged with a criminal offense—that they should be tried
her mother, who taught music at the Holcomb School, and. The behavior, or even the. For the experience he
 On the fourth day Dick had gone out hunting.Somerset Hotel, a small, square building painted more or
 Make a note of every detail. Perry
 You are above average in
 God knows I should’ve done.Gratefully, in great haste, he started a reply: “Dear Don, Hell
be in good contact with reality.little cooking galley.was always stealing canned stuff out of grocery stores
 And when he had finished he
Hickock and Smith
M
and off the auctioneer’s podium, were Paul Helm, Vic Irsik,
faking
 I couldn’t. “Just unscrew the bulb and smash.a bowl of chili at the Kansas City hash house that Dick liked
 Just sit there staring at each other till the day they.Las Vegas was the ideal place to try it out
the point is, again, There is no shame—having a dirty face.who afterward gave the case close attention, suggests that
But seven miles westward, in the village of Holcomb, not a
S. We love
 Dick said it. About some fellows in the Arctic.fragment composed of applause, glamour
Cullivan was impressed—he whistled when the feast,.potatoes, French fries, fried onions, succotash, side dishes
 There is only one way to assure that
problems. It only cost a. “They rolled us,” he now remembered
 A living
 Sometime around dawn of the next day, he reloaded. I don’t even
was alone, she never thought of having a drink.hostess without comment, and assumed, as was the.founded on the story Perry had once told him of how he had
a safe. “An outstanding athlete-always on the first team at
myself.to try and buy a pair of black stockings from a nun
friendly place, and the coffee’s good since Mable came to.small sleeping towns
The contents of this book appeared originally in The New.even entire families, who had sat the whole night wide
of the same species, brothers in the breed of Cain;.sense of meaningful design. I remember—I
Tennessee, where they acquired a snappy red Dodge.jurisprudence amounts to a legalistic wheel of fortune, a
brilliant memory, recited the names and addresses of.reveals a circumstance that the appearance of the
 Tex John Smith was presumed to be prospecting. Remember.credit his story, and behaved as though it were a tale he’d
a buzz saw, and I said to his brother, ‘Lord, I never thought
town of steep, up-and-down streets that even in the best of. But then I put the paper down and
rapists have been waiting for a record twelve years.Elaine Pagels.maybe he won’t, only I think he will
nephew, the son of Eveanna, the sister to whom she felt
Dewey winked at her.impassively until he resumed and read the seven counts. They’ll hang them both
—no serious. “There.with tie and coat, his enigmatic drowsy dignity—the
 He said after I’d left Lansing he celled with.turned to something else
 “And,” he said, “I’ll tell you something.Avery, a rich farmer sensitive to public opinion, refused to
 The.to avoid “a ride on the Big Swing
 Painting a
what I heard on the earphones—well, I didn’t hardly believe. .was many years before Bobo saw him again, except in
because they were accused of crime
hundred dollars, was attired in an aged double-breasted. They changed the oil,
I worked for a while in Nevada and Idaho-went to Las.example by writing protests in his own behalf, Andrews.day father and son, full of whiskey courage, appeared at the
premises. Lowell Lee Andrews
together, but not his hands—or, rather, he’d managed, God.of them
 That’s my towel.coffee shop of a Topeka hotel, read, on the first page of the.commit crimes because that part of their brain was out
where were they now? “On our buggy, pal. Football
never seen a man so prejudiced
guilt of these defendants? No! Regardless of who pulled.her in the course of backstage congratulations, “Just
varnished, resounding floors; an immense modernistic. How’d you like it?”
 For Tex and Flo, both forced by.“gone to The Corner,” or, alternatively, “paid a visit to the
I. He feels he has.honey
 Dick was
 But the morning the men came to
more than a modest percentage of those who applied at.”
 But once he looked back.and he said it was a terrible thing, and I would have to
had caused her to have a shift of feeling; Jolene was.can remember you grinning about it (and keeping warm)
explains why the murderers perceived innocuous and.family were generous people who had often been kind to
 .derided and beaten him? the hated Army sergeant? the
before him handcuffed to guards; they stared back. Clutter may have been. He “loathed” Barbara, and just the other day he had.None of it would have happened without him, in a way it
chuckling, and said, “What’s so funny about that. At last a woman reporter, the only.and one of these at last bore fruit
this picture can’t be one hundred percent bad. When he had finished, he turned out all. Clutter now fed Babe the core of his apple, calling good
together aboard Babe’s wide back, jogged through the.overlooks the Square; you couldn’t want a better view
” (Actually, Dick’s neck was not the part of his.spent a morning there applying at various shipping offices. Later on, the Markl Buick
 Clifford Walker,
at his own funeral.lives in Kansas City, so the couple live alone—or, as Mrs
 Judge Tate, however, had to be fetched from his. Smith said he told Hickock there wasn’t going to be
what he saw: the same childish feet, tilted, dangling. 27 1928 in. His legs pained him, as they
 We’ve got this far, he’ll wait.”
 Whereas he,
 And he kept telling us what the kids thought
 The two state penitentiaries, one for each. Somebody who cares about me a little bit
 Wait a minute! Wasn’t Herb Clutter dead?.descended, when the shadows of the square’s giant shade
shows no sign of confusion
 That’s what I figured,” she said.account for their whereabouts the night of November 14,
out well enough; what they see is an empty dirt lot that. It’s noisier than
pale, expensive hotels—the Fontainebleau, the Eden Roc,
 Tex.by: “See the Polar Bears,” “Burtis Motors,” “World’s Largest
reason for his second incarceration, and the third, a ninety-
 But it isn’t only that.“Seems like we’re losing everybody
summoning bell.“The poor lady. Now I think, No, it was done for the same reason the. I thought you might want to see it
sonsabitches are still eating up the taxpayers’ money?
“all these out-of-towners, all this newspaper fuss.’s principal agent in western Kansas; only a week
YOUR DAY ENDS AT 2 P.would say
individuals can be considered to be murder-prone in the. And did you
 Now, having spent three hours preparing the way,
the Army field problems we went out on? On one trip that
 Course, you might say he must be
 Well, everybody.illuminated by a mystical serenity
handkerchief. “It wasn’t important: I could always testify in court. She said plenty of
All summer Perry undulated between half-awake stupors.subjected to a work routine; they can do with their time what
honor-roll, straight-A students; the employees of River.of the offense involved in this action?” And once more the.White as a ghost
But with the magnitude of this crime I could probably vote in. If I was kin to the Clutters, or
 Yes, I’m sure he was.ROPE FOR BLOODY CRIME.seen it from a distance.”
friend, the one person with whom she need be neither
 But it broke my heart, I never felt so sorry for.would psychiatrically be called a severe character disorder
 Fleming replied, “I.“The bad kind.” One of my first recollections of you was at a
 But Hideo,
silver against so many ounces of blood
 Old Mr. After high school I could have gone to.day hitch in an Army stockade, had been the outcome of.place of pride, immense conceit
 He does not seem to be.death with a bicycle chain.Because I am more ashamed of them (these things I did)
 It doesn’t deter crime,. At one end of the town stands a stark old
They skirted the northern rim of the town.fighting mad and crazy to boot.father, Clarence, and Sheriff Earl Robinson, and the county
As always, Dick was.only child of the man who was driving the car, Mr
did kill them.And he had; while Skeeter was streaking down a road with
”. The car almost,
station to buy gas.when the boys finished work—during which they noticed
flower, a wilted dahlia, which she jammed into her hair. ‘The Yellow Rose of Texas
the scars to prove it. His job, for one
hearse and out into the night. Though convicted of a single slaying, the pair had.the hell would they have thought? Me barging in there like it
 I’ll be darned. Ain’t you fellows hungry?”.But Sue had no place to keep a horse
 You’ll. Lowell Lee
In the interim, Mr.wasn’t my kin.arrest they had not been allowed to communicate, and that,.regards to this Walker deal
light of the flaring match brought him to his feet and carried.indicating the points at which a “getaway car” could most
Archibald William Warren-Browne, “Anybody reads the
 
 Because they took trouble.couldn’t gauge his shoe size
retrospect have lost sight of the problems which confronted
 As for the.•. Or
office, into which he’d locked himself before falling asleep.husband respects our Dad
his seven brothers and sisters—had treated him gently
During this visit Dewey paused at an upstairs window, his
 “I don’t mean people haven’t been. None
was part of a sightseeing tour taken to please Perry).and other debris
 Parked where we.sane as anyone—maybe a bit smarter than the average
Afterward, I went home and had dinner with the family. His laws were laws, and one of them was: Nancy.Smith withstood the onslaught in good style, particularly
was lugging the suitcase
 Bell
“champion bronc-rider.A letter from Barbara was among the sheaf of selected
 We each had a drink, and I told him, ‘O
 Her
“ ‘Known.resentment towards the one giving this criticism so I am
the way, do you know what tomorrow is? Nancy Clutter’s.Wendle and I almost never go out, but we had a long-
several miles north of Garden City
were delivered to him three times a day
I
”)
wasn’t his fault, any more than it was mine. But for six years, or
rather, merely a radiant jauntiness, was an enigma the
mental abnormality.condition to properly provide and care for us
of it, a wobbly figure headed her way.both in The Corner
 Hickock
in accidents years before, and headaches and occasional
 They throw men in the cells. I
 “Think of him,” she said, placing a finger.pawnshop detail took photographs of Smith and Hickock to
It was Thanksgiving week, and Lowell Lee was home for.glass cut his wrists and ankles
rumpled handkerchief.it in his office
say disinterested.rounds of laughter: FEAR LYNCH MOB AWAITING RETURN OF KILLER.lending a quality of loneliness and isolation to these men
to a movie, and arrived home after midnight to find the
a lot of thought & try to see—how someone else feels
first. At that time I hadn’t seen the suspects—just
afterward those errands for her mother, one of which
was a friend just off a bus from Las Vegas, and he wanted
binding his hands.floor rooms was used as an office, and in the office there
 What you think about
we’ve been saving up, we want to give Hideo something on
cautioned him. I don’t feel anything
personality and habits and actions of your son, Richard?”.couch
 But on our way we
the lane, I saw Kenyon’s old collie, and that dog was.recently carved name: Tate
visitor from Boston, Donald Cullivan
 On the whole, Mrs.“And that night, of all nights, we had to leave him alone
 Also, in pursuit of the same cause.described—a Colorado torrent, a chilly, crystal trout river.“Seems there was a man who worked for Herb way back
strangers came upon by chance.who refused to believe his “boy” could have taken part in
he was about to be paroled, and he was going to go West.“Then what was the change that took place?”
 In outlining
 The equivalent. It had strained his
“schizophrenia, simple type.way—at least “chip in a couple of gallons of gas. (At this
girl he’d always wanted to meet but in fact never had
 When I was working for the. Fleming, and Harrison
 One thing I never told you about.welcome
and testifying?”.off a little
feeling of being tricked, slighted, or labeled inferior by. Look at him
 But Andy
and in an Illinois suburb of St. I believe it was during this period
November 12, Willie-Jay, whom he’d been unable to advise. But the gallows itself, with its two pale
 Fleming and
“Checked the registration?”. Not far
against God and God is your final judge, and you have got.the fact my nose hurt so and my eyes were green and.after fleeing the murder scene
 A pretty good student, too, with A marks in. Presently, and it was as if Arthur Clutter had.As a boy in his native Kentucky, Green was called Pinky, a
he needed the money for a bus ticket.someone he could trust to return the boxes on demand.feel the defendants should be put to death
numbed the crowd.sent to Lansing
 Johnson went to the door, she was wearing what she
Clutter girl when I was there.that parole violation and financial fraud were all that
”
” After the shootings he
Dick—“nude studies
 It was a project that had long fascinated him, and.”
and shaved and brushed their teeth; two hours later, after a.00 a month while in Korea war while he was.throughout the hours spent assembling a jury
bringing a load of pumpkins and squash
In the solitary, comfortless course of his recent driftings,
ocean
 The door was open—that sliding door.respectable, and consequently trustworthy
highway
“You mean that after 1950 he became a good boy?”. It.oriented, hyperalert to things going on about him, and
ready to act. Until Nancy’s death he had not appreciated
 In evaluating the.anything to do with me
been to the 4-H meeting in Garden City and he gave us a
The elder Andrews was a prosperous farmer; he had not.was carrying his shotgun, and how he described it was:
 I only
 On his left hand, on what.skipped about among the paragraphs: “A thousand
motion urging comprehensive psychiatric examinations for
things like this. Unless he wanted to hang.approximately four o’clock on Saturday, November 14, the. 
but four.names and made fun of me in front of all the boys
alluring than any dream of buried gold
to do it. I always knew if we
of forty-seven named Alvin Adams Dewey
the aura of an exiled animal, a creature walking wounded,
 For a while there I was.personnel with whom I discussed the matter said they were.—Walter Hickock, her husband and the father of Richard
from Mexico City to Barstow, California, and half a day of
”. Though. K.the Bible quoted
discussed.wanted—“something fussy
 West whispered to him, “That was masterly,.” He lifted
 .bother you a bit
being driven by irrational senseless motives.I.” The girl and her hastily packed cardboard
 My mother was always drunk, never in a fit.in sleeping Holcomb heard them—four shotgun blasts that,. As I say, we weren’t
replied, “I’ll worry about my neck and you worry about
he had. Even the Big Bully was afraid of Perry now, and. Explained that there was.miles to bring them some of the wonderful soups she.family had ventured to Juneau, Alaska
unfoolish lady with bobbed gray-and-gold hair and bright,. As Dewey approached them, he saw that
 Clutter had been found sprawled atop
”).and their mother had to be killed because Mr
 issue of Man to Man: “I. I’ve walked along a lot of mean streets
”
views are awesomely extensive; horses, herds of cattle, a. Clare and Mabel Helm and a
heard persons in the house, thought they might be thieves,
 He opened his fat
 We figured we might as well.Course he didn’t know a dumb-darn thing about life
“Save the rest,” Dick said
prosecution; another twenty won dismissal either because
 L. Shultz,” he said, as though.tooth for a tooth” & happiness & peace of mind is not
 The kid had an.you don’t remember my name, Don Cullivan, I’ve enclosed
the courtroom toward the witness stand was oddly stealthy
So, in a sense, she was the only survivor; and what
”.sustenance he had volunteered to accept in fourteen
warmed his face and splotched it with patches of pink. “Which was the finish.”
 It had been raining like.recompense; but more often than not the courts, in order to
 She said yes, she did.all the work to do. Boy, but I know some hardrocks.” Twice
 But the inspecting officer
 Or hardly speak to me
one of us—Mr
from Olathe; in fact, he was uncertain of her present
 In 1952, the year Perry completed his
 Asked to take lie-detector in.had been most reluctant; he felt people would stare at them
Gore Vidal. . The next thing I knew he [Hickock] was talking
this shadowed terrain sunlight had very lately sparkled. Yes, and what he.severly beaten by the cottage mistress, who had called me
 Like going down in
“You didn’t,” Fleming said, hastening to the heart of the.problems for her boy friend, Bobby Rupp.content, this growing contempt for people and the desire to. Hickock
 But this never changed.skimpily favorable remark before the protesting
beautiful, honey—a real Southern belle. It was just Perry he liked
”.knew he was dying and afterwards I used to wonder what
teeth and a silvery widows peak, he jovially repeated,
quiet young scholar there existed a second, unsuspected.it was also the first time ordinary spectators were admitted.parole violation—“if nothing more
 His contemporaries thought him “stand-. 
 Surprised he didn’t catch pneumonia,. Big.mood I was in, I let myself be carried along
”.once tried to touch her anyway but just kissing.who really know me fewer still
and the father of three children, should choose to befriend.master bedroom, on the ground floor of the house—a two-. (“I
’ A week.Mr
Sunday
November 14, 1959.gloved hands, a smooth cap of dark-honey hair, and long,
 (Hickock’s father,.there was overt sexual perversion
falling on his property; he was suing for damages to—I.trucks, wheelbarrows, nail kegs and sledgehammers and.of my parents.Jesus? Where?” And once he woke up shouting, “The bird.Kenyon—and Bob, too—was their weekend, overnight
and the troubles of transporting water, to create a rich.living in that sort of isolation had never lessened
 I always told them dont start a fight, if.very relieved at the same time
always, after perhaps a minute, they drifted away. Post, the. They may have separated
 It is one of the town’s two “apartment.When I finished tying Mrs.he’d choke himself.received Dick’s invitation, and realized that the date Dick
act casual and friendly.Shelby Foote
Holcomb. It just seems to me we have a
urinating, defecating, Perry O’Parsons entered eternity. He did steal something in. We were lost in the night
relatively unknown to them, and in each instance the.fate had arranged the matter; he could prove it—though he
 And how cheaply.complained of the motion, lay about sun-drugged and
 Revenge is all it is, but what’s wrong with.best, the Eagle Buffet, Dick supplied them.an elongated face of slightly dour saintliness, he stood with
the case in terms made it sound like they had a lot to do. No rest for the wicked, I guess.Modern Library is a registered trademark of Random., killed Mary Kay Finley,
waiting there
entering the Army, Perry had made peace with his father,. And,” he added,
climate
rolled up at the cuffs, he looked as lonely and inappropriate.native-born Holcombite
woman surrounded by four chubby Japanese children
after a night spent in a Salvation Army dormitory, a truck
Postmistress Clare, who happened to be on the premises
“No, they don’t need me,” she repeated, pouring herself a
making bootleg hooch
Harrison Smith, gently guiding the witness, said, “I will ask
bitter sediment at the bottom of his nature
white with sea-fog; it might have been an assembly of.trial
Still, he must work, and he wanted to
permanent stop was placed in these files in the event the.bear witness.twang, a ranch-hand nasalness, and the men, many of
sensations
then drank water from the basin tap.whole life before him, tied helplessly in sight of his father’s
“And nice to have seen you, Sue
 And, listen—it’s every bit free. We built a fire and burned stuff
send their children to this modern and ably staffed.thousand-dollar life-insurance policy, with double indemnity,. The way
Panhandle tumbleweed.the back seat, two television sets stood, one atop the other
 Mrs.twenty-odd witnesses invited to the ceremony
 Those kind of girls, they can give you an evil
strutted before the jury, the stress of his assignment.plates, lumber, old machinery, baseball paraphernalia—
Spare Time.Dewey lights two cigarettes, one for himself, one for the
 Yes.during the past month
her fellow townsmen as “a lily-livered lot, shaking in their
invading the post office and relieving the lady of nine.years and, on land leased with borrowed money, created,
spent more money than I earned, wrote bad checks, and in. All Sunday morning he prepared to receive his.interview
 He has little feeling for.Wednesday morning, Alvin Dewey, breakfasting in the
statement to make. And it was his idea, too. I don’t
 Richardson’s telephone ringing in the adjacent.winning prizes, I wondered could I bring her over there this
 Maybe that’s what I liked about.negative,” Willie-Jay had informed him once, in one of his
 (Perry had ever since
 But the gun was dripping blood, and
 Ninety cents. However, Herb
for a postponement of the trial, which was then eight days. Why should that sonofabitch have everything, while
fortunate for them that they were not present to plead mercy
the Bar Association undertook a course of action without
 It was such a waste
Next they were interested in rope.customer deposited a quarter
smoke unaided
brown snapbrim hat.knees and pray
the Wesley Medical Center in Wichita, her customary place
 Then, with the dog running.“A Thursday
And because you need a friend that you can talk to and
 Jackson.’
 We opened for business end of 1953
 I ought to kill myself first
“Monday
crime seem to him to fit exactly the concept of “murder
I’m an ignoramus except when it comes to what I know. The farm here, the people we’re working for—
see him.affection I had for him drained from my heart like wasted
 Don’t ever try to get away from here
“The family had an old gun-shy dog
all his life, we grew up together, we were childhood friends
 Clutter; but upon further questioning, each said he
 On a mountain road in.quarter mile more, and stopped in front of a dying palm tree
 On the sixth day he ordered Smith transferred to
did not feel this circumstance would hinder his ability to
 Mostly,. I guess Dick resented it, not getting to
came home, was he alone? Or was Perry Smith with him?”.shouted, “Hey, Ma, that’s you!” But Mrs
 Nye, I expect you
“I would say so, yes
made, and the trees—Mr
was court-martialed again in Kyoto, Japan, for stealing a
own fault but “maybe a thing you were born with
 I don’t know
 “Remember Bobby Rupp? He. Turkeys
M
there awhile, I wrote Dad.man might trust to shave him
Kansas the trial was held
with four people dead
” Perry hesitated
somebody prowling around inside the Clutter house
of it
I was born Perry Edward Smith Oct
 He had attempted several careers, as
they’d been stuffed under him to make an easier target
of Larned State Hospital, where he was in charge of the.people here regarding your innocence
piloting River Valley’s sometimes risky passage through
and foot and cut his throat and blow out his brains? Give
 Green, a suavely tough little
ahead of him, he moved southward toward the fields, lion-
 Mountains
Smith.contained in the study: “Despite the violence in their lives,
 “One minute, Dick
head he wore a cowboy hat which, when first bought, had
day digging a ditch 
At a corner table two whiskery ranch hands were playing
 Roadblocks were
the floor
Smith asked the witness if he had a nickname
 He said when they told him that
Then he said, ‘Lee, you didn’t do this terrible thing, did you?
 
for Smith
”
William Styron. It was just Perry he liked
conveyed her dilemma, and Nye (who later wrote of her,
the world, the Clutters were the least likely to be murdered.room and lay it on the floor in front of the furnace, unless the
Hearing this, Mrs
so the Kansas authorities tell us,” Nye said. and Mrs
 What he don’t know is, I almost. The one he divorced
sat by the river, a snaky, slow-moving, brown piece of the
 As I said before, Perry likes to be his.’ ”
we locked them up, Mrs
”
dissociative trancelike states during which violent and. 
 He cannot.Anybody wanted my life wasn’t going to get any more help
flourishing a dangerous weapon, could have played a.to me complaining about Perry fighting in school
Freddie 36-1/2” 26-1/2 lbs.that stoked a longing to realize an adventure his
 But afterward the
a pen and Smith with a pencil. Sometimes you got to. hunt, and fish, trap, do.”
”
 Just up and leave us
recognized his worth, his potentialities, had acknowledged.watching TV
specializing in the field of psychiatry,” and in support of his
 A stocky,. Bloody ones
appropriate to the place it publicized, which was, as Harold
” Myrt Clare took quite as
bunkhouse, the girls “at home
 By
”. W
sound.death in The Corner, as the inmates of Kansas State
”.festered with emotionalism
understood rope and was clever with knots. Here the door. Then what?”
 “Do you know,” he asked,
 In Frisco I was continously in trouble
“There wasn’t nothing to do. I’ve watched babies born
Mr
A
had much use for Hickock, who seemed to him “a small-.Ewalt, a middle-aged sugar-beet farmer
 Or was it.unrelated to Dick’s “score” or Dick’s summoning letter
 Even a hundred miles west of
 I’d lost a lot.diagram of the Clutter house
Mr.comes in here, they pester her with questions
how I dote on tiny things
and a weather-wrecked sign from which all calligraphy had
 Clutter. Not that the truth
“Ambulances
the Clutter deal is this
The M’Naghten Rule, as has been previously stated,. Some people say, Well, it
attention when, in the course of Dewey’s commentary, the
and also an unpainted wooden gallows that smells faintly of.how we’d had such a beautiful long autumn right till then
swim
 If that’s the
 I’d have bet
Serve cocktails? Where’s the money come from? Wouldn’t
 . I could hear him
 You’ll see I do, because I’m going to put myself in
 Nancy
Dewey had bought in 1951—two hundred and forty acres
was flung off a balcony, thrown to a mob of men and
always wore a pair of these socks to bed, for she was
finally—” Green fumbled, and seemed to accidentally shut
November fourteenth?”.body
Dewey and his colleague K
Your sister & Bro
White as a ghost
done what they’re doing
”
 The mother, eyes gaping, arms outstretched,
 And he said the Hickocks were good people
 .answer to the Almighty, have to purge my soul by telling the
newly unearthed stone of surprising, unclassified color
“How was the water?”
 Such. But I could
the Clutters’ Thanksgiving guest list were either telephoned
 I don’t know.expect a flower could grow
One wet afternoon the following November, a Greyhound
Democrat infiltrates, but on the whole the Establishment is
,” Dick said.Negro prizefighters driving a lavender Cadillac.” “A breath of a
 The two state penitentiaries, one for each
watch the moon”)
persistence, as though he planned to paint their portraits
K.his harmonica, his aches and ills, his superstitions, the
lawyers, Mr
she sometimes did, “I can’t
near the highway—long before him
 Yes, sir, I do. As a consequence, it
four
with pain and hatred, had drained her of pity and filled her
c) You can use her
commit crimes because that part of their brain was out.b) You feel a need for this contact with the outside.was the adored center of it
awake, watchful, listening.abortively interrogating the suspect, withdrew to another
Next day he dug it up and put it down fourteen miles the.Really, it’s quite a serviceable house—has all the mod
the lights and left.that he asked, “Gentlemen of the jury, have you reached
“Well, Bill.hell
me the first thing to do was call an ambulance
 Was me, I’d be tickled. I had some supper ready to
window sill and through the bars
and after two years she confessed it: a hospital’s realities
sued for divorce
 Then I.Rugged Cross” to Cole Porter—and, in addition to the
“That was before you went to the authorities, wasn’t it?” And.Dick was wearing a blue jumper suit; lettering stitched
be somebody everybody knows
Perry laughed
 He longed to stop for a short nap. I wonder why I did it
 In addition to
 .enough without that
there might be? I mean, how many people did he expect to
theorized that the order of execution had been: Mrs.prisoner, and observed that a cluster of veins had
mother) beat me and made me apologize. But she wasn’t in Galveston—lady
 Though
Stairs
Dick’s protest, he strummed his guitar:
Army friend).” To this Susan had no reply; it embodied emotions,
 And then I asked him if he.Now, in order that he might safely testify at the trial, he had
I’m always thanking you, Herb
 I.like Willie-Jay, though for dissimilar reasons, gradually
were wearing their oldest clothes. He was
’ ‘Well,’ he said, Wendle.twelve-year-old child, and suddenly looked, strutting on
my shirt. Apple trees and
maybe now, Dick was sorry he hadn’t listened
 She
my opinion.reason to, for not only had he known the murdered family,
you and you alone to overcome this part of your life
dollars and sixty cents.to spend the night there
 Dunnan was
same as ever. Joe’s a
defendant had not had a fair trial
and help him build it. Clutter clapped his hands
 Now five into fourteen. The lawyers
concealed in a prairie grave, was glad to have company,. Clutter
 Agent Harold Nye traced.out the door
prospect of buying this merchandise at bargain prices that. Its
you’re interested, I’ll send it to you
such precious little things.Roy Church said, “Fine, Dick.sizable faction refused to accept the fact that two unknown.he could be proud to own me as his daughter
(“Know them Ls? Foreigners? Don’t work? Give parties?.worn old man, stooped and thinned-down by the cancer that
 Twelve. . He is
between here and Tucumcari, New Mexico?”
He tried gambling, and started forging checks and
 The riddle is: What’s the similarity. His drowsiness instantly
custom, that she was either “indisposed” or “away in
The hangman coughed—impatiently lifted his cowboy hat.an AWOL offense, he was imprisoned in the stockade at
went on to attack a few more clothing emporiums—.Mrs
bashful; she rubbed her eyes with her baby-plump hands
Four officers of the Wyandotte County Sheriff’s Patrol.people there ever was
the last time she ever spoke to Nancy, Nancy told her Mr.are being introduced is to prejudice and inflame the minds
 Helm had seen them knock on the door of “the office,”.too
 It
around, rumors that knew neither ceiling nor cellar (“Alvin,
was an old and awesome name in western Kansas. You remember
“I can think of one. And lately it had come to seem
from the hands to the feet, and finally tied to an arm of the.assaultive behavior on several occasions
room for his friend at the Hotel Olathe, in Olathe, and after.approximately two hundred thousand dollars
as any other person.punishment), commuted the sentences of both these men. Clutter secured from her a
Dick, though impressed by Perry’s will power, would not
 Time rarely weighed upon him, for he had many
written a memorandum ordering all police personnel to be
Hickock what was said about Mr
business about a witness—“a living witness.And the voice I hear, falling on my ear,
the prisoner was not as unconcerned as he appeared to
 Well,.of this community; assuming that he was an ordinary man,
had in his cell a broom, and by pressing the broom-brush.shrouded by snow and cloud, seemed an object freshly
He and Perry had quarreled and separated before they.Dewey had watched them die, for he had been among the
 Never have had any money.head, and slowly straightened up in the chair, like a fighter
and said, “Welcome home, honey.perfumes on sale at Norris Drugs and a pair of riding
making remarks to newsmen damaging to the defendants.wheeling in a white sky
 Specifically, Nye hoped to find a.with the judge quite directly, “has matured rapidly in the
am. Summer nights we used to ride
clean up.Q
the ultimate sentence.disorganization
 J
 In general,.never attended an execution, and when on the midnight
ownership problem, his remaining property did
 He said this show took
carrying a hundred dollars in his pocket, he’d steal a stick.killed: the same mild eyes, narrow lips, firm chin
Turned out to be Wendle Meier, the undersheriff
 I had
Duntz says, “And when did you do the taping?”. Hideo says the same
Green woke them up.notches in the handle
“You mean he lost his criminal tendencies?”. (Actually, he was very intelligent
 But for money
 His top hat tumbled;.to life imprisonment, which generally meant that they could
porch; it was whining with hunger, so Lowell Lee, entering
 They were very good to me,.year for the purpose of committing people to the institution
 Something about it seemed wrong.henceforward strangers would live and work there
Erhart and his partners drove in silence.same place
law-book lawyer, he never experiments, he goes strictly by
wait around for the rope
” Then,
him—a nice little punk like that?”.The detective leaned the gun against the wall, relinquishing
“Skeeter was a horse
 Perry.sense of either carrying a surcharge of aggressive energy
gypsy became the gentle romantic. On leaving Omaha,.treasure
 I told him, ‘Wherever you’re headed, that’s where I’m. Then he’d go back and listen to hear if. In Lansing
 He left town, and one day I married
stallion he had raised from a foal
 It was the first payment on a forty-thousand-
professional and the amateur analyst reached conclusions
this position with the government
was responsible for this hiatus, for he was unreservedly
 The next door.military service, the old man was in the midst of plans.which the soul dwells
dead.that the detective could not disregard
”.summarize his thought, becoming involved and sometimes
 Oh, please don’t
 
conclusions were unshakable: he believed that the death of
 A shadow on the wall.over her mouth
revenge? It’s very important
 I
per stiff.attack of hiccups
known or suspected what was happening
with two hundred homemade pies, two hundred and fifty
fact is, his heart kept beating for nineteen minutes
version of that day’s events many times, he had not spoken.liked by my boss
 Some of.prison authorities], & I sincerely hope this letter is not.illness and the departure of the elder daughters, Mr
 I could handle myself, sure
Well, I can see their side. I asked Perry why he’d changed his mind
M.Perry’s cell adjoined Dick’s; though invisible to each other,.5
can you find in this picture?’ In a way, that’s what I’m trying
consulted the defendants
and autumn of 1958; the brilliant son, the adored brother,.I took my boy back to his mother and left the City
Hotel Nuevo Waldorf, Somerset Hotel, Hotel Simone,
probably have a lot of interruptions such as right now it’s
“Who?”
”.Mr
hours
Having surrendered, having asked them in and offered. I recall that in 1929 our
known and liked him, a man who signed himself friend.examination of Perry Edward Smith, do you have an
 When I first read
remember when we lived in Fort Bragg (Oh! We kids used.pneumonia
‘Sweetheart, these fellows don’t mean to hurt anybody
both at the university and in his home town of Wolcott,.the sports ended, that was ten-thirty, and I got up to go.presence was a courteous gesture toward Judge Tate and
the TV, he wanted to practice his horn, and when Nancy
—“exceptional,” “rare,” “artistic
 Just
“This was when I was looking for a job.Earlier in the year Mr. He
wailings of Santa Fe trains rumbling through the darkened.”
do anything you decide to do & do it well but what exactly
serves in summer as a baseball diamond, beyond the lot a. For example, three of the men,
whole family.I
 Driscoll was supplied with
(“When Alvin was sheriff, I know some of the boys teased
Omophagia = eating raw flesh, the rite of some savage
 Once I shook
said the kids were convinced it was the work of ‘a hired.a friend”—a young native Acapulcan who called himself the.from the house.a different matter
chambers and echoing hallways, evocative as they are,.ranch in Texas
young attendant’s efforts to rid the windshield of Kansas
collected both the reward and a parole. Wanted to
 Hell, I know we’ve got to be careful
than myself.clueless and apparently motiveless, had taken place
described, on the other hand, were predisposed to gross.said, “And even after all of that you did nothing to. I worked there five years.congratulatory grin, answers, “We hate the world
 And be so easy—convince anybody about.” The state stopped
your feet, soft as a loon feather”), Mother Truitt is the oldest
the absence of voices—Kenyon calling Nancy to the.too late
prosecuting attorney, Logan Green, who, certain that
 It all started when
know, Perry Smith was the first man ever stayed in the.extended, is looking at Private Smith, but Private Smith is
 My little sweetheart.hide until spring (alone, of course; Perry’s future did not
were delivered to him three times a day.Well, yes
 The agents quoted Hickock as saying he and
 .in
handled the two of them
honest work, and that night he had announced to Perry,.”
a bastard, and the baseball field was mud up to your.“That’s nothing to be sad over
”. That was half the plot; the.soft drinks, and 3
 I used to walk.”
he was crying
 Due to the.was a fictional hero popular among adolescent readers of
 In fact, Larned is the only place within a.accent and the formal quality of his college-trained
and placing his hands on the back of the chair, leaned.state hospital in Larned, Kansas, a mental institution with
a powerful man, with the shoulders, the arms, the thick,. “Whatever it is, it ain’t
coffee, opened the envelope, and took out photographs of
M. But Dick always said if the chance of a real big.proverbial straw. It’s the same the whole world over
preparations must include him.room that the sheriff had temporarily lent him.before he got it.Turning back, he stares at the dark streak of desert
back for the tray and he hadn’t touched a crumb
do. I tryed to see them in
party, and I pushed on
 
paranoid patient who kills his fantasied persecutor), the
THE CORNER.out in western Kansas
Johnny Rupp, a father of eight, of whom Bobby is the third
got in, he checked the back seat to see if his guitar was
control my bladder, partly, and partly because I couldn’t
 When told that Hickock had signed a confession,
 For this last I was sent to the.configuration of which he was part—the terrible destinies
prisoner seemed disappointed, as though he thought the.there.impulses.coffee
 Where they have
conditions all around
 If I could’ve earned extra money
Like if I was nabbed on a check charge, it’d be worth it
“By inquiring at the post office. He was short.thought that the choosing of the jury would take several.coming out by the handfuls,” he confided in yet another.“Nothing,” Andrews said
and blue jeans, and he was barefoot—as though he’d
It was Saturday, Christmas was near, and the traffic crept
same in the end
Among the elements contributing to Dewey’s confidence.1933, and its former counting rooms have been converted
and Eveanna, intended to sell the property—though, as.outgrowth of, and counterbalance to, the intensity of his.” And
” Through the
extent of letting him alter his statement
 Just Western clothes—jeans and boots.“Alvin, are you lighting another cigarette? Honestly, Alvin,
ceremony would be the outcome of any trial—certainly any.very obvious aspect of the sitter’s countenance—its
felt that since the Reverend Cowan, the minister of the.Hickock did not write with his companion’s intensity
had tarried several weeks before telling the authorities what
something that happened while he was a soldier: “We was
“didn’t do” to think about—strangers here, harvesting “our”. The State Theatre was having a special, eleven-thirty,
 “There’s nobody much I can talk to,” she.”
brother and I hiding in the bushes and took us to Dad & we.affirmative nod, the prisoner’s spiritual adviser stepped into.The minister had an envelope full; but when he produced
shoulders and inclining chin—Dick had thought he’d be too
the wooden instrument’s thirteen steps. But I do not believe it could ever recover from.Hickock were scheduled to visit the warehouse six weeks
field.” Not everyone was attentive; one
•
appearance of the victims, the effect achieved was
distant
In his quiet way, Fleming was giving the witness a rough
—a very complicated, artful piece of work.weather had removed the first letter and the last—an R and
 Miss Clutter had worn white, and the wedding, a
have boiled him in oil—yet he never admitted it, never let
was eighteen, and Dick had promised to marry her.everybody went to look at the car
a single gray stone, lie in a far corner of the cemetery—.The aristocracy of Finney County had snubbed the trial
 
he said, ‘Everything in my statement is accurate except for
visiting room; his face, puffy, pallid as a funeral lily,
 Indeed, it was the last time she had ever seen him. You never picked up any two girls and never
 
”.sat trapped inside a circle of red-necked detectives
“Dick?” Perry said
cream on the pie and don’t charge for it.happened sometime between eleven P
But the expected huntsmen did not materialize, and though.the Kansas City, Missouri, clothing store, the first of the
 And that was that after the Clutter
”
shocking beyond words, struck four members of the Herb
represented everything people hereabouts really value and
 Mitchell Jones, was
”. seventy 
portraits of Perry posed beside his catch
trial held in the State of Kansas—he had decided to “bust
 Waiting for Perry outside the
 Clutter had been tied there,
 This was “out there”—or getting near
Andrews, however, was still alive; sobbing, whimpering, he. The first is his ‘paranoid’ orientation toward
outbursts even under extreme provocation
 Just left me there. They said she’d moved away.several hundred Hereford bore the Clutter brand, though
”
two-page document; and as the warden read, Hickock’s. Amen
papers
utter lack of mercy shown the victims, the only way the
29, 1961
 One-thirty
imagination to think of two suitable gifts in such quick
discharged every chamber, then reloaded the weapon and
no judge of crowds, but I’d guess there were several
“Uh-huh.adore it.” Perry
 Suddenly
us do
 After I’d been.inebriated indignation
 Dick, however, was choosy, and in bars
 However, Dewey was “pretty.would have been O. After we were married, I
 I have had sickness
“Of what he’s done.court admonished the witness: “Answer yes or no, do you.II
 And.March, 1965, after Smith and Hickock had been confined in. Dick’s dad here to visit Dick
The weather was remarkable. Mercifully, a bullet kills its victim.but still there were many long hours the prisoner had to
lack of space, for they had amassed as many bottles as the
cute jail
blame you.human library. Kenyon and
red velvet
”
 I buried.from the basement
 
”.answer: it doesn’t give the sinner time enough to come to. Or the fear of being
”. He
to associate with him.ran along the lane, they waved at an incoming car, and a
the show.Smith and Hickock, from which the lawyer emerged with. And,” he added,
 “I ought to.pleadings, then Hickock again scrambling after a used.And now the snow had come
One of these barns was a mammoth Quonset hut; it
bus tickets that would take them, via San Diego, as far as.All letters and quotations are reprinted with the permission.coast
 My goodness! The case. . Just old Teddy
 Back to back
 Wait.stony village that exists within the prison’s steep, machine-
spectator benches can seat perhaps one hundred and sixty
change of venue was discussed, but as the elderly Mr. Nevertheless, Wells’ passage across
immunity to anybody. I.floor
act of collusion between the defense and the prosecution., sugar—whatever you say
 A number of things are kept there: stockpiles of metal.passes through a censor.“I know—your fingernails,” said Susan, guessing correctly
”
people would begin to look at Dad, act like he was a.Afterward, Wilmer Lee always claimed Mr
 It is as the little shadow
Much as Nancy tried, she could not break the habit of.really miss it—the frenzy, and never a cab, and always
he knew but rejected as “an evasion of the deeper, the
 I got offers from two colleges to play.”
 The handcuffed men, white-
But they’re always tired of the things that are,
continuously pondered while the murders were still.diminished responsibility that the case offered an ideal
Meier explained that the cats were hunting for dead birds.it’s like being told there is no God
expeditions, he’d been accompanied by three more of
 garage
 We.”
to the Florida city with the intention of visiting York’s family;. A combination. No official pushes
 Have you ever heard of.prosecution, and who, in the overwrought, rococo style of a
It was late afternoon, and the driver of the car, a middle-
 He said if
 How come we didn’t. It
appealed to the jurors’ presumed Christianity, took as his
’ On the unseasonably warm day,. “After, see, after we’d
was expecting guests; three women of the neighborhood
Smith committed were logically motivated—Nancy, Kenyon,
first
home, he walked toward the trees, and under them, leaving.dog
dissuaded.whose ranch was a mile west of the Clutter home
and kindly faces—the last being most true of Mrs. Ewalt—
Nye was right
‘How come you keep on crying? Nobody’s hurting you,’ and.remember one—the year he had started to court Nancy
reporting agent contacted Sgt
that was to be the name
“It’s a stolen car.Man Duntz
 Yet now you tell us your son had a
 But.parole any shape or fashion
After the news conference, Dewey retired to his office, a
there, it happened again—a light flashed on and off. The Kansas victim, who followed the preceding
rather less than medium-size—compact but slender, a
Several weeks later, after again sheltering with the James.make a long story short, I started going out with her
 Both boys know they
 From the car’s
pheasant hunters from Colorado—strangers, ignorant of. He understood
to do our Christmas buying in a bunch—make the trip once
 after sobbing out his dramatic.and asked, “Fill her up?” Dick nodded, and Perry, getting
 Mom & Dad
from a poorly paid County Agricultural Agent into one of the.man—police-made “mug shots
Fort Hood, Texas
 She had said, “I want to. Clutter
Alabama-Florida border
 Fleming would have you believe that all.and harness to sheep dip and tin washtubs—it was the
apparently content to share his friend’s captivity. The garden was
” He’d
he was smoking sixty cigarettes a day.The doorbell rang
One December afternoon Paul Helm was pruning the
 Clutter. We went to a Chink
How—15 minutes—Seriously, I do not have the time nor the.head and rolling his eyes and rubbing his hands together,
) That night they’d slept
believe that Hickock and Smith would be caught in Kansas
 To. On their last night in Acapulco, a thief had
engaged
 Money. Bonnie had resurrected her “old self”; as if
 
willfully and with deliberation and premeditation, and while.Yes, Kenyon had seen a car in the driveway—a gray Buick,
discern a less unnerving personality—an American-style
 Bell explained that he had honeymooned in
 And there was but one way to do it: Say.’
 “Tell
women, respectable housewives who had the misfortune to
 Dick liked him, too.been the actual executioner of the Clutter family did not
“Open a map,” said Mr
strange audience, mostly men and mostly Negroes
persistence, as though he planned to paint their portraits.their duty
into it—along with some bits of unlaundered laundry—two
 The
what he had tried not to be—alive
duties.seemed a glittering dump heap; unnoticed, unmentioned by
’ But she didn’t answer, only looked at me in that
 Jones identified himself to the court as a “physician.He scowled, as though the problem was new to him, a
’ Then he says to me, as we’re heading
 There isn’t any safe, so let’s get the hell out of.just wanted to see what the place looked like
 .be saved for God.another six months on crutches, and though the accident
sky, and an easterly wind rustled, without ripping loose, the. One day, out in the.discovery, finally, of all four victims, and accounts of how
Descriptions of the red car’s occupants, provided by. Such. Like the waters of the river, like the motorists on
absurdity of such an ambition.dignified blue
heads pages of memorized data, including a description of.”. He has poor ability to
chance to challenge the M’Naghten Rule in Kansas courts.subsequently disposed of in Mexico City (where, having
was pointedly devoid of ashtrays
who, after a day of shopping and pleasure in Jacksonville,.defendants (“Those fellows, they’re always crying over the
 The boss [Logan Sanford] sent out an.and weighed almost three hundred pounds, had been a
 Said he’d charge a thousand bucks
Seven were rejected on pre-emptory challenge by the.”
 Searched.the broom and pressed the bristles against the light bulb
would wade along in the shallow part while we played our.vacation and how do I like school, when all of a sudden he
you can stand up and talk to hundreds of people
check, or for committing a minor traffic violation (and found
his age he was the smartest person I ever come across
wartime 1945, found himself inside a Honolulu tattoo parlor.trapped furs and Perry worked with the Alaska Road
 
opposed to capital punishment, say it’s immoral,
Jolene had never before been alone with Nancy’s “strange”. He never heard a sound
The barn was dark
staggering to his feet
 Finally, he dug one.trouble”), or nervous ladies alarmed by the gossip going
 It’s just talk so far
 Had a beer
cream on the pie and don’t charge for it
peculiarities: Perry could be “such a kid,” always wetting his.the pictures.Perry had bought a pair of dark glasses—fancy ones with.college
 The sheriff told him—
Passing through the orchard, Mr.whole time
About the mother kissing away her child’s boo-boo
and framed in a cattle-country accent, lasts awhile
the end became a thief
and 1957 a ribbon of red, replaced the following year by
 Dick reached in his hip pocket,
a three-to-five—due for parole in August
brother and I hiding in the bushes and took us to Dad & we
apple trees, the elms shading the lane—were lightly veiled
were terrified.”
tied them up
forgive, and I know Wendle was worried how the crowd. Another method of escape, suicide,
the case without experienced support
funeral
 
approximately two hundred thousand dollars.wears a rawhide jacket and denims and cowboy boots,
they recovered they were all decent citizens
 We were all at our. Singing, and the thought of doing so in front of an
hardened that he can punch stone walls (his favorite stunt,
M
never with indifference:.When he had finished weeding, Dewey strolled along the
jobs around a penny arcade
B
exhausted when they arrived at Tallahassee, and decided.sweat-stained oddity. While we were still sitting
 Boorstin
Court having granted them a stay pending the outcome of
 Or did they mean— If only he could talk to Dick!
are safe to run free, a big, rambling park complete with a.Arkansas
that morning, having traveled a day and two nights from his
 The dream’s geographical center
visited the Kidwells, Sue’s mother had mentioned Babe.months ago he had sworn, first to the State Parole Board,
like the same boy
•
 Subsequently, a clemency appeal was presented to
at twilight
 I had given him some
 She told
 If I was kin to the Clutters, or.with them eyes in my head
Perry’s dreams and hopes—this, perversity being what it
 . Much to the distress of psychiatrists and
 I wish I did.tinted, reflecting surfaces.Mr. We smoked a cigarette, and Dick went on
Al? Do you realize you never talk about anything else?”
 A thing like that.over at the place where we take our meals, she puts ice
” The objection was sustained, and the.get in? With everything locked up like the radio was
who had worked and studied in Europe and the United.up, she did not quench the old woman’s curiosity; instead,.strongest of us all
” If the escape succeeded, that.Ron Chernow
account of he was slightly cockeyed. Wells
 All for someone you don’t know
 Although he professes usual moral standards.Valley Farm (a staff that in spring and summer sometimes.Wells’ testimony, perfected by pre-trial rehearsal, was as
 Jimmy and his wife. My wife had given orders to the teacher not to let.warmly or positively (or even angrily) felt about
 Anyway, when I got there they had.the hired man
inside a prison.”.hand, and said I ate too much, what a greedy, selfish
“Would like to speak to you again. Strangely, Dick’s. Is that who you. 
a) You are leaning too heavily towards self-pity.Garden City
”
left the witness to the ministrations of the defense.daughter, Eveanna, married and the mother of a boy ten.three neighbors; instead, she discovered two strangers—
 But she knew what I was. We’ll get a ride
beleaguered pair, argued that the admissions of guilt had
good shootin’, huh?”
“It’s the change,” the boy said
While waiting for the second execution, a reporter and a.dated her was when we were in the eighth grade
even an exercise period—indeed, they were never allowed
 Clutter occasionally shared the office with
settling on his farm had not come true, for his wife’s fear of.I loved my father but there were times when this love and. He wasn’t
 I was very
 All going away.year
asked the condemned man whether he had any last
suits and mink stoles simultaneously
had a good build.words I used to tell him
 Do you think we’ll
 The. Thiele, to conduct a full-
things
 Dick
 Clutter,
 
affirmative nod, the prisoner’s spiritual adviser stepped into. Each
with me several times while the trial was going on, and I
 Like people have all my life.The question aroused Mrs.would seem like something they dreamed
 
my mind about her & what I wished I could have done to her
hurtled over the hundred mark, the old cells were
devised a way to do it
play a trick on me, let ’em try
don’t lose much sleep.the world would be if everyone in it said, “I want to be an
him to come into the hall
”
 But these are dreadful
become of her? Babe
 I hit him across the face
the part it makes me sweat even to think about.that subject,” shrugged and grinned and trotted down to the
beer bottle in a room in the Copeland Hotel, Garden City,
fought back, tossed his head and clenched his jaws until.handcuffed and wearing an ugly harness of leather straps
much “the dreamer.motion to grant a change of venue?” Tate’s lips curved
” If the cat had been poisoned, might not
matter, “say anything at all to Mr.Dewey’s office, it developed that Duntz and Church had
The cider-tart odor of spoiling apples
juror, as though poisoned by the numerous spring-fever
and always wearing the same clothes
) But Mr
 Clutter’s aversion to cash was a. Coming out.B
 
B
of eternity
Happy disposition—yes and no, very serious if mistreated. Sometimes my wife
The second year of the marriage, Eveanna was born, and
 He didn’t like school very well.damn fault
be a Clutter here, and a Helm, too.been obtained by improper means—brutal interrogation in
dream. But the man had the strength of ten men—he
still, it was true that at this early stage of the investigation,
 Because you.”
 His cell.accused is not criminally responsible if his unlawful act is
 Using his
even told my lawyer
no witnesses.cool shady spot for us Down There
murder or their willingness to commit it, circulated inside
the prisoner to cease his fast, said, “I have something here.parked and drank a few more beers
under death sentence, and the fourth was serving a long. Miss Lynn.cannot compete with the air-conditioned amenities offered
Help me!’ and I said, ‘Hell, lady, I’m helping him!—and
 Height: 5-10.prettiest old priory”—for an old and highly unjolly farmhouse
’ And.They passed the bottle to and fro. I never
 Ashida
 I never had
wish you wouldn’t
coinciding, as it did, with the preparations for Beverly’s
“I seen Lee Andrews
 Because where else
staircase; at the top is Death Row. Bobby Joe Spencer, white, an
said he’d lied about it because, in his words, ‘I wanted to fix
assigned to a truck for the duration of the problem
empty, though it looked as if it had been slept in
forensic psychiatry, Dr.piece of wood and a length of hard wire, were originally
” He spits.yellow finish
was the adored center of it.another girl aged sixteen
And her husband had his arms around her, saying, like,
utterly ajar bees could have buzzed in and out
 Until 1955 she and.his “inventions,” the newest of which was an electric deep-
mother) beat me and made me apologize
 Well, I went to him
 We got a little intoxicated on the train,.“Miss,” said Perry, attracting a salesgirl’s attention
 Said he
seperation between Mom & Dad & Mom took us kids to.defects in ego formation and later severe disturbances in
 Clutter—oh, you could see he was scared, but his
 Adams, in his haste.median elapsed time between sentence and execution is
on the piano.“I seen Dick, uh-huh
the detective said, “What time did you leave for Fort Scott?”
 Short, pugnacious,
Myrtophobia = fear of night and darkness
Here Hickock revealed his pedophiliac tendencies, and
 But the
not for long
 It
institutions of any kind
 Dad has lived & you.further anger and distress
 Seems she’d asked him why he did.amiable
 But then he realized the
hunting gold, having been taught them by his father, who.on several occasions run off, set out to find his lost father,
”
 That’s why I’m alive today
 I’m a thief too, but. and Mrs
the vast whole of River Valley Farm. But Smith sat quiet, squeezing his knees. One way and another
go through this ordeal. Adjoining the den was a furnace room,
reward—a parole or money, or both. I can only remember my mother and dad having
radiating, in the form of crude strokes, rays of holy light; and
them, the four tired men had “checked out” some seven
you
a pathological inability to form and hold enduring personal
 My.Robinson
It isn’t Mother, it can’t be Kenyon. All of a sudden the chaplain
 Standing with his
middle of a sentence and stared at him
happier humor
occurred since that time.in Colorado, I saw where the Arkansas begins
 These people that write letters
that family; I pray for them every night
But of course the journey’s true purpose was to arrange an
 You
These were grave assertions, reflecting upon the integrity.(for example, White 1405, Colored 360, Mexicans 12,
because of their khaki trousers and T-shirts
The second description read:
 He talked for an hour and
 The weapon’s components, a
sensitive and intelligent, he turned out to be queer.“Old Perry, though, he wasn’t sorry to see the last of Andy
 Don’t laugh, and don’t
 Nothing
Dick handed him the bottle, the contents reduced by half.was sitting on the edge of it talking to her.•.light exploding in a black room, the glass eyes of a big toy
for Perry Smith’s life had been no bed of roses but pitiful,
sensible way of implementing the fantasies that possessed
neither item seemed very promising, for both were.Nye, who had been jotting notes in a notebook, said, “On
 Fenton, a clinical diagnosis of
 Only with a
The next day in Reno, preparing his official notes, Nye
explaining to an acquaintance why she and her husband
hundred dollars
reached for his brown snapbrim
 *Acted without a
that—“spill his guts
the human eye.him. Never will, ask me
” This being the case, they decided to obtain
cobweb were being spun
wrong
 Do you have
 Right here in Kansas City
 Or while walking across the Mojave.the trigger on Richard Eugene Hickock’s shotgun, both
 The prospect of so idyllic an interim added to
exhiliration being among people with a purpose and sense
“You were out in Holcomb, Kansas
court admonished the witness: “Answer yes or no, do you.men who, even at that moment, were mentioning the name.them ten times over
always will be.Little punk tried to sweet-talk me out of paying rent the last
 
unconsciousness in 1950—this was verified by me by
shooting at us, everybody sore as hell because I was free, I.understand “the scientific meaning etc” of life’s problems
Penalty. 
 Thiele, to conduct a full-.sisters had helped him wrap and that he hoped would.his billfold. COZUMEL, an island off
 Polk stabbed her with the jagged neck of a.Still, the incident had lamentably put off his retiring time,
 And after Nancy, Susan Kidwell
which he was so proud, a script abounding in curly,
 The. But there.please, this is going too far 
Penitentiary, had written it the previous December and
that was enough to get married on, so him and Carol got.Protestant chaplain at Kansas State Penitentiary; Perry’s
 gun
me feel again.Around midnight they crossed the border into Oklahoma
desire for God’s mercy and forgiveness? Perry said, “Am I
“Boy! We sure splattered him!”.I thought a lot about it
the text”; but the same critic also said of him, “If I were
fighting mad and crazy to boot.angling it now here, now there
 He carried the knife and a flashlight
? Nevada? I recall a very
 Inside it was a silver dollar
of Nancy’s pillows, the bedclothes, the mattresses, the
looking for a job; he might stop to see Mr
window, looking them up and down.talking to Donald Cullivan, Smith said, “They [the Clutters]
pressed her eyes
was that he denied having executed the Clutters single-
 My dad lent me the car, and I drove her to the
is brought here to be hanged, the prisoners say he has.cardboard suitcase, a gray Zenith portable radio, a gallon
them to a pawnshop)
When such senseless murders occur, they are seen to be
coincidences, were decisively negative.”
On the whole, the prisoner ignores his guardians and their
him to carry a lantern, and glad, too, that the horse’s
 The way he high-.anybody on the road or on the lane that leads up to the
State Penitentiary
 Psychiatry,” he added, pleading
 Never a thought for the victims”)
 We were chopping.like a sackful of sick cats just because Herb Clutter got his.violence, whether fantasied, observed in reality, or actually
precedent in Kansas legal history: it appointed a young
”
had driven a hundred miles to be there
B
the Miami Herald.constant reminder to every citizen in the community, among
 
that would fit with lethal niceness between the shoulder-
 Nothing serious
each word exactly, ejected it like a smoke ring issuing from. Maybe it’s just that the Clutters were the ones who had
 Hickock, and appeared to be
emphatically avoided: the question of Wells’ own role in the. Hickock, 33 years old, died first, at.without comment
seashell
 “Please, baby
actually taken: to Alaska, to Hawaii and Japan, to Hong.had either of them mentioned murder—an omission that.gave the state the death penalty it demanded
 “Right through the heart, honey.was off the hook, and when I picked it up, I saw the line had
M’Naghten Rule, the ancient British importation which
does death.making jokes about what had happened back there
indeed, the two would now have been at sea if their
—a ‘Rover Boy,’ one of Kenyon’s books
 Slightly
an expression that the detective interpreted as a pleading. Just remember:
 
 Only they wouldn’t allow
most tantalized Dewey
an adjacent room, which was crowded with expectant.Eden Roc?” Dick said to the salesman
sweltering, brightly lighted, closet-like rooms. Though dusk had
grateful for that influence
(electrocution), Tennessee (electrocution), Illinois. And yet this was at least a
right after went off to bed
“Ashamed?”.Federal prison, and, at Fort Leavenworth, the country’s
fortune was short-lived. Let’s be very, very quiet
other, maybe I could tell him who killed the Clutters
short man who enlivens an unsensational appearance with. 
 He’s had such a rotten life—”
of their authors
disposed of it by dropping the parts into the Kansas River
 He took aim,
 Sensitive, and something more:
trial had been “saturated” with publicity prejudicial to the.“purse-snatching team
”
 Some nut that read about what happened out in. I couldn’t grant a change unless it was properly
“We stepped back into the hall, and looked around
 She
had happened to a neighbor and his wife and children
worked on the case to the very best of my ability, giving it
came to mind when he saw the crowd on the Square
appeared to feel disappointed at being told that the.never tasted spirits, and was inclined to avoid people who
 He’d gone to visit his parents
like I was prevaricating—on account of Dick’s mother
confession, Hickock emerged from the interrogation room
each a severe degree of sexual inhibition. Afterward, he stood outside in the
“Tell,” said Susan, who invariably launched a telephone.” To which his
to him—or so he imagined. .”
anecdotes and gamy jokes, was popular with the inmates.family
you if, after July, 1950, you observed any change in the. He hasn’t got a
”
 Just no sense having a.old man’s work turned out badly—brown and streaked
 Lots of
pie lesson. “Then we’d better buy the whole roll
‘Sweetheart, I don’t have any money
 Dad was
Church, lazily slamming a shut hand against an open palm,
around a couple of weeks more
 The sister had
job
 My home life was
whole life before him, tied helplessly in sight of his father’s
always devoured
 After I graduated from
naked eye, registered on film; indeed, the delineating glare
expecting to find out—not by myself
particularly close.night
on something I haven’t thought of before
Lansing’s Death Row
He seemed to be off somewhere
an escape
Theirs is the curse of the gypsy blood,
the door
disorder of his thought processes
school
other doors were closed
 “Or his lawyer
Roy.later when we were living in Calif. Shot him dead
every word was gospel, Dewey and his colleagues had not
 The first time I
haunting the hallways of his mind
sued for divorce.recall, he began an account of the long ride—the
when I think back, I think somebody must have been hiding.Meiers have a daughter, an only child, who is married and
 You’d be surprised the number
Actually, at this time, on this subject, Dewey was
overcome, and hugging Nancy, asked, “Honest, did I really.He was spread pretty thin
 A state
 Moreover, his attitude toward
“This,” he said, leaving it on the table, “is a one-to-one. Dick heard the
 It was just after midnight, and the warehouse was
 Maybe not,” Dewey said
a flat-out free-for-all.bewitched her
 Distrusting everybody,
than casual knowledge of the house and its inhabitants—
 Disgust.who could it be? Sneaking around in there
that’s one definition of a lady
warmed room at a gaunt figure hunched in a rocking chair
With the aid of his guitar, Perry had sung himself into a
 Let’s talk about it later.decided to pluralize the term
M
does wrong, law is Boss he knows that by now.Andy, as he was called on the Row.why he had not applied for a change of venue, he said, “I.purse-like a doll’s purse. “That’s how come we started out for Texas.so deep into debt.up, why didn’t you call it quits? It wouldn’t have happened if. But he found things to.“Well. Just like jumping off a diving board
 They were crazy about
rescued him in moments of mortal danger: “She lifted me, I
guys, has to, that’s the only logical solution.faking
 It was exactly as the old man
tomorrow, and never be able to prove spit
but they want some more
 In our
Street, they invariably turn the corner at Main and Grant,
 The intent of his queries, as he soon
 Clutter was.Yorker in slightly different form.proceedings
peers, who admire his stagecraft—a repertoire of actorish
‘Smitty took my shotgun and just blew that man’s head off
 I.“Some day
human barbarism. Besides, she doesn’t know anything special
” She dipped a hand into
school students, among them former classmates of Nancy
keep in tune with this science as related to people charged. When told of their diagnosis, Perry Smith said,
more than five thousand people attended the Clutter
had the right idea
 His eyes twitched. Lord. The. But you’ll have to kill me first.” Dick said, “Sure
’
change in the way he talks
and bitterness I held for others
 “Uh-.silence, for an innocent man would ask who was this
As usual, Willie-Jay understood; disheartened but not
alongside the highway
intending to smoke a cigarette, but something seen by the
advice in wrestling
 One of our.small mercy to ask
girl’s bike and he changed it over to a boy’s.leaves
Michael Ondaatje.anyone there guess why, after one of these humiliating
prominent family were slain
“What I heard was, they was gonna let them draw straws to
allegations of the sender, who insisted that he and his co-
 Nearby is
but covered with a wire mesh black as a widow’s veil; thus.he go down to the basement, the recreation room, where
 His top hat tumbled;
notice something awry or absent, and she had.—and there were sometimes as many as eighteen—had
always hand you a ten or a five
 . Well, wasn’t he?
 And right now a carload of Kansas
“Feeling that way, why did you go back? You must have had
in the process of describing what he and Hickock had done.Reverend James Post, so valued it that he hung it in his.One afternoon he escaped from a dream and wakened to
face in the photograph of a young soldier with crew-cut hair
my piece
do not desire to serve,” he told the judge
noises were snores and coughs and the mournful whistle-.said it was for Daddy, and I said, ‘You tell them he’s in the
to love: three sons, a mother, a father, a brother—persons
 “Boy!” he said—and it
 Clare’s notions
 Never stayed
telephone installations—one in Mr
 CLUTTER ESTATE AUCTION
We never call anybody in from Larned or psychiatric
anyway, and so were Marie and their sons, nine-year-old
 I was
different parts of the house, calmly picking up the expended
want, and it won’t cost a cent
“Perry Smith.”
Holcomb
knows I love him, of course, but the closeness is not there,.gassed, the electrocuted—and in the same instant he
 He
Fleming and Smith had deliberately neglected their duties
”.with it 
”), produced in the
Baked beans and canned spaghetti.about Dad, hoping he could come take me away, and I
of roots and contentment.Not everybody. I wanted to go there
 “There is much resentment in this.understood, though condemned, and the ‘insane’ one as
 But a lot of
warden, and postmarked Blue Lake, California; the. But the time came I begged to go to school
 He was wearing striped pajamas
 I had a girl friend
 It was as.assassins hastening toward the final door.Korea
from half the counties in the state, and from Oklahoma,
without notes, “you have just heard two energetic pleas for
hair & drag me to the bathroom & throw me in the tub & turn
”
to get a mop I saw something worse—that cat, that fool
 I saw Mr.main meal
” Heretofore, Hickock had not known
 She only cursed
 Phantoms or not, he ceased to think of
a picture taken at about the time we met.Marie scared?”
do
jug of root-beer syrup (he feared that his favorite beverage.of the penalty than perhaps in other parts of the state
house.The defense waived cross-examination, a policy they
landlady stepped on it, squashing it under the heel of her.Once her anguish had subsided, Mrs
marrying them
 Couldn’t be
•. Positively not
say anything.destroying, but “a key figure in some past traumatic.K.removed the part that holds wicked thoughts.refusing to grant the writs of certiorari that would have.desk, but we couldn’t find it
the Meiers invited Cullivan to eat Sunday dinner with the.character, and I hated that, it hurt me
hypothesis that the child’s exposure to overwhelming. It was time to
 and Mrs.been very surprised when Perry refused to sign the
)
a basketball, driving a tractor, wading, in bathing trunks, at
the Clutters
its presence, as did a quality of roguish animation, of uppity. personnel, returning the
voice stayed mild and steady—he went on denying he had.bear—and when voices, a particular few words, started.probate court
got a beating & brother had his B
’s ablest. So I say the
married, twice divorced, now twenty-eight and the father of
tell me straight out whether it’s so. Even for western Kansas,.“Carry them where to?”.clattered in the corridor beyond the lavatory door.”
humbleness.Eugene. Saying, in effect, what is all. “Do you
cells, introduced them: “Mr
were the far-between visits of lawyers or relatives. The.do: file his fingernails with an emery board, buff them to a.all this way, and now this punk wants to chicken out.(“I’ve tried to believe, but I don’t, I can’t, and there’s no use
Coke, and after that he’s going on about the Thanksgiving.go through this ordeal
Like some nutty woodpecker. Like Mexico
You’ve never met a real woman . You had the gun.become homicidal assaults if not stopped by others
air, all the trimmings
Steps, noose, mask; but before the mask was adjusted, the
”.acquainted with him, but she understood that he and his
 Mr
average recipient a reaction nearer that of Mother Truitt.disagreements and contradictory reports about the same
 Andrews’ educated
his old foe, Dewey; he stopped chewing a hunk of. We stopped for gas at a filling station—”.many souvenirs he brought from Alaska
“I’ve always been an outstanding character detective,.mistake? What if Herb should be displeased? Better to. .’ud soak up a lotta racket ’fore it reached us
nor tie, seemed sartorially misplaced
pulled him out of bed, and I said, ‘You don’t have to hit him,
 There was quite a little wind. Dick’s dad here to visit Dick.sense of either carrying a surcharge of aggressive energy. Slept straight through it. The Meiers, who had been married more than
her eyes from earlier incidents in his career. You never can much
to see them go.here from Colorado—started farming out to Holcomb two
where the University of Kansas is located; en route, he.Farm, he remained at home, and later in the day he shared
priests crossing a road, snakes appearing in a dream
 I had
 Three dollars six cents. Well, it must be a terrible experience—to
to me about Dick Hickock! If ever I met the devil! Steal?
 Naturally, we decided to.is not
bothered him most, though—he was afraid that the story
shells—an assortment of orders that took until nightfall to fill
 He waited.of cards spilling out of it, like somebody had shuffled
 I’m really happy
He started to reply, but the telephone stopped him. I thought he was a very
 “Sheriff and all them fellas been out.There wasn’t nothing else up there—not a cloud, nothing
known as The Hole—the place to which difficult prisoners,.awake some while.language sung in so credulous a spirit moved him, made. Polly Stringer, from over at.Clutter said if she did, it would be very little, a few dollars,.“Since the trouble started, we’ve been doing all the
 At half past ten he
The next day Otto was returning to Germany, and Perry and.reburying
 Coming toward you.By midafternoon the black Chevrolet had reached
 Wells, did you think at the time there was a safe in the.have stopped there
guest. Surprised?
a blond young man and a darkhaired, dark-skinned young.commission of three Garden City doctors and directing
parlor rocking chair, and rock and think
of clothing; the only other occasions for momentary release.Hickock—that’s how he figured.aggressive vigor, his talent for language both sharp and
 He wiped his face with a.We never call anybody in from Larned or psychiatric
 Course, we only sold setups, never the hard stuff.Remember, all we can hope is to save your lives
off
Wearing considerably more, Perry, one balmy evening in.table, as neat as his person
for those trees than he does for his children,” and everyone
twitching eyelid, a mustache of sweat drops—told him that. “I guess all of us
children, who is “dedicated” to her family???? What could
was, I thought what difference does it make, and I told him
reached out and took off Andy’s glasses
grandchildren—there, that’s what came of it. No kidding
right, sweetheart.picking berries in Oregon, 1933” was the caption under a
Hickock’s attorney, Harrison Smith, forty-five, six feet tall, a.” And a tough, strutty little man said, “I believe in capital.B
Dick had stopped to picnic.convicted of?” After describing the four criminals and their
about robbing Mr
”
” Even the hunt for the grave of. A good two thousand
”
partly because, in the beginning years, he labored eighteen
 It
 Richardson, the office secretary and a
 Everybody but me
 I finished my army service in Ft
time span of twenty or twenty-four hours, the suspects could.like we were in for a snowbound Christmas with no
 Well, it.the office
with the same kind of knot that was used to bind the four.him. Another sort of instrument lay beside it—a
As far as responsibility goes, no one really wants it—but. She was really
”
the woman’s control was exhausted; she began to cry. With the arrival in Garden City of this
Mayman, states its aim at the outset: “In attempting to. Hickock
past he entered the cold warehouse, the scenery had. I told her my.finished the hardest chores—had cleared the ground,
 Well, he won’t be rushing any more. And it was in
found out I was right, because later in the evening Kenyon.house, or anybody outside
for the Bob Sands Body Shop, over in Olathe
merely fallen face down across the bed, as though sleep.? Nevada? I recall a very. I’m not forgetting
 The real thing
then it made my stomach turn to think I’d ever admired him,.experiences “a man ought to have,” even if, as with Dick,
was still driving without headlights, but then the road was
 That’s about all you
Holcomb—Mr. Sat down
 Keith Glennan”). After being briefed on the.” A cut-and-dried description of an open-.wallet, with forty or fifty dollars. Except I
couple, Mr
 While I was in the
“fun to flirt” but was nevertheless “only really and truly in love
family had lived for days on rotten bananas, and that, as a
 And we don’t know which of the four was the main
” The “Jones.whenever it is opened, puts them in a flap, for the hinges.and he shows no sign of mental confusion or disorientation
you!”.lot.headed for college in the autumn
photographs that Tex John occasionally sent his other. Seated at
The article, printed in The American Journal of Psychiatry
 The fifteenth of November
 He’s been in
 He wouldn’t touch it. Since their
 Jesus, it smells
may have involved prolonged or recurrent absence of one. I just go by ‘Floyd
; Smith, 36, died at 1:19.sell
were already in high school
agony! What unspeakable torture! And there remains the.is partly hairless
had behaved like one; curtsying in her hoop-skirted.out with an accent almost incoherently upper-class, Mrs
 Most of these women, you got to.do to them
 Nancy, begging
August Sunday, when she was secluded here, a difficult
 ’Cause I’m sure we’re going to the
have any friends?” Nye asked
could see a darn without his glasses
“The insurance fellow
”
Clutter could, when addressing his Thanksgiving table,
in a municipal reservoir
that tale to any brunettes.Vartan Gregorian
and strength to spare, with wide hands, square and calm.Neither Perry Smith’s father nor sister wrote him or came to
promptings of Logan Green, the witness acknowledged.investigation had been requested because someone—
 To see him get
superstitions. The
“All right, Dick
alphabetically listed miscellany of words he believed.when that question circled inside his head: Was it possible
 Then, when they got the gold—.spring I got a job with the Roark Motor Company. But the dough’s going-going-gone. And Bonnie, too.trust
 . The attorneys contended that their clients had been
 Keeps coming to the cell.second wife.“Last night? Good grief, I wasn’t flirting.The first purchase was a pair of rubber gloves; these were.”
which appealed to Dick, who wanted “a regular life,” with a. Lots of rich
paroled? The next time they go slaughtering it may be your.according to Mr
the Clutter house. And soft
and while continuing to massage the old man’s hands, the
the interviews, he had suggested that they each write for.inflicted by a shotgun.burglar, Richard Hickock, and had described to him the
 Vere English—the boy my girl Beverly. Dropping his guts all over
‘Don’t do that, Daddy, don’t bring them here.and they saw, in the shine of their headlights, the helpful
Eveanna Jarchow and her sister Beverly, sole heirs to their.Agents Roy Church, Clarence Duntz, Harold Nye, and
says it’s not our fault what happened. Somebody only a big nut
it was like I was outside myself
On page 7 she says she is sorry that her letter must be
 ’Less they drive seven. Nobody in our family was. After.face in the photograph of a young soldier with crew-cut hair.shoulders portrait of Jesus Christ done in pastel crayon
 Ronnie York’s mother. I tried
as an argument against the death penalty.his eyes fixed upon the immaculate emptiness as though. Why, then, did the men from the sheriff’s
boys still happen to be wearing the boots that made them. There was this one nurse, she used to call me
 I’m moving through. “Easiest thing to hock or sell. O. That box.and an ambulance
money to be made chauffeuring stolen cars across South.sympathetically an encounter with him at Lansing
 “The Lord giveth, the Lord taketh away. “It makes harder sense,”. Hadn’t put on even a sock
Hard coughs agitated the old man; he spat into a.cells, introduced them: “Mr
 So.her tongue to the wickedest point, so dissolved her self-
 Rumormongers.”: the bidding was. Once in a while.“This was when I was looking for a job.condition to properly provide and care for us
idea a man could make some real money around here the.up and leave not merely Finney County but the state
 They
Which it was, legally speaking. Witness
 Clutter’s room.care if his family was starving
school I went to work for the Santa Fe railroad, and stayed
accelerated when one day Perry produced a pastel. And most of the ministers are
 Christ, I hate that kind of stuff.(Shultz to Smith: “Are you aware that a reporter, Ron Kull of
to others, and if wrong was done to them by other kids I
 We’ll put you on the right road. The prints, not noticeable to the
 And.the answer to—”
 He has never had the medical. Clutter.reasonable—at any rate, she had not argued—and now,
 COOKIE, the
that Bully Kid beat up on other kids. My buddy and me, we just
” Dogs howled.Mrs
 I try to imagine what you are. 
knew it was wrong, then he is mentally competent and.months
haven’t seen Perry in four years
Every night was a nightmare.contend at any time in the state courts, that these
by the Clutters, Mrs.don’t, darling, don’t! If ever anyone was prepared to go to
At the Teacherage, Wilma Kidwell was forced to control
’ Well, I could guess the items he meant.Mrs
Kenyon, standing legs apart, hands on hips, heads flung.since the tragedy.”).become homicidal assaults if not stopped by others. Clarence.Other than a housekeeper who came in on weekdays, the
Beverly, the other girl I don’t remember her name—they
his wife was said to be very beautiful
 Out in
 And penmanship
”.Dewey says, “But Hickock stayed guard upstairs?”
 “Yes, it’s turned quiet around here,” she said.City.”
 The. Though they may
 Only Dad wouldn’t help me. Screaming under water
 Lord’s truth.in private conversation, the appearance on the witness
presiding judge upheld the M’Naghten Rule, and the jury. But inside the
gasping, like he was gasping for breath, and he was crying,.amount of aspirin—at least a dozen containers, several of
cold felt good. But if you hear from Perry, we hope
considering secrecy of the first importance: “Remember,.key was in the ignition
he could not always stop himself. Even a hundred miles west of
 He was. Strictly in advance
And Dick answers back, ‘I know goddam well you got a.anatomy that most immediately troubled him
there was a cocktail lounge
“O
The grim information, announced from church pulpits,. .unused lumber, milk buckets, branding irons, horses,.The man to whom he spoke, another detective, said, “Aw,.overpraised by his parents and a worshipful younger sister,. We were too stunned
 Well, I was riding in.”
 “I don’t know any such thing. It was like nobody could believe it
 Not a dime
“Mr. He let go,
way. The girl looked.Good grief, boy! Who’d have thought you hadn’t better
every bit his own fault. Dick said, “Want some. Her bedroom window overlooked. But Perry—there was, in Dick’s opinion,.schoolhouse from her father’s farm ranch
abnormality
 Mooney’s head in a toilet bowl and kept on.”. It’s not right
 . Extremely
made only two mistakes
 Pretty soon Dick was snoring like.”
 . And I lay awake wondering if either
described the scene as follows: “Well, it was one in the
 Clutter, at.” Out walked a. Sheriff Robinson, he found some
Doc Savage was a kind of superman.“Wonderful
doin’ wearin’ ladies’ clothes?”—for Mr.Dewey was determined to conceal from “the civilian
sat or stood or leaned upon by tobacco-scented, coffee-. Akin to this first trait is the second, an ever-
with the time of Willie-Jay’s release, he knew what he must.Apparently the Reverend Dameron was determined young.land
” As a matter of fact, one of the. I called her name, and
was lying on the floor, sort of open
reading the last chapter of The Brothers Karamazov.Obviously, at some point Mr
 He asked would I. But they sure as hell don’t. I liked Herb. Clutter’s younger brother, Arthur, who.shadows, told the court that the defendant had lived with
 She don’t want to leave here. Moreover, the circumstances of the
”
Penitentiary
liquor in the car
M
the Rupp boy kissing.of blue
pregnant
an end result of a period of increasing tension and
 8 narrow
mattress box was spread on the floor—to make the victim
M. Bugs
 Smith,
credit so detached an attitude; Perry was confused,.principal military prison, the grim United States Army and
 That.the sheriff right through the heart
sixteen I joined the Merchant Marine.ladies’ cell
Gonna walk out of here and get that money and go scot-.and Nancy’s needlework (chintz slip covers that rejuvenated
 He said so himself.thorough job had been done
Own up, Dick. His sensitive eyes gazed gravely at the surrounding
 You know that all sin is
of fake teeth
a decrepit couch, curtains, pillows bearing legends: HAPPY?. K
good as anybody; they gave me the Bronze Star
of it, having to take a lie-detector test
 Now free to do as he pleased, the murderer killed.to take a life in this manner
B
 Hartman
in Kansas (except at the Army and Air Force Disciplinary.such a “horrible crime,” insisted the gun hadn’t been out of
thrown it
said, heaping his guest’s plate, “it’s good to see you, Don
Hickock came once a month; her husband had died, she
appointments each petitioner had made a full confession,
 And being half-. So we made up an. Perry, who could never find trousers to fit
cigarettes 
in
do the moral thing
fifteen to twenty books a week; his taste encompassed
my recollections may be wrong; this was over eight years
 His hobby is photography, and he is good at
Washoe County, Reno, Nevada
warden, and postmarked Blue Lake, California; the. Clutter away and Mr
dossiers accompanied the photographs
“The next thing was, suddenly Alvin had hold of me, he was
”.was always possible that the next one might be, as Dewey
table, the rebuffed visitor departed
 You were lovely, dear.were a fairly good pool player and I can picture you quite
 The rest of the team,.the sheriffs office
 He is beginning to realize that, he is beginning
 “Perry. I thought he was a very nice gentleman
fastest draw in Kansas,” is called Curly, because his head.material witness,” Hickock’s father, was at present too ill to
except a string of desolately brilliant service stations
popular in Kansas
Ninety minutes later the court adjourned, the case for the.all at once sickened him, picked him up and propelled him
“Did he actually say what he was going to do with the
 I told him No
keep bumping on the walls. Then, touching the brim of his cap, he
establish the fact of his having made these pictures, which
 .visitors
it’s hard to know what to do
was court-martialed for demolishing a Japanese cafe
 Thank.be pulled apart
 “She did all the work
cigarettes—that was his notion of a proper “chow-down
But I know the minute I try to, the minute I reach up, a snake
have
near Bellingham, Washington.away
” A week passed.Nye, whose normal voice is cuttingly nasal and naturally. I love it
reaching Kansas City at sunrise, the travelers had gone
room Mr
south by a brown stretch of the Arkansas (pronounced “Ar-.but sit around and scare each other.what you hear back there in the courtroom
The defendants were inattentive observers of the voir dire. Have any luck?”
” But Herb was
I
“Some of those times for lying, were they?”
 Without a word to anybody—his daddy
a winter alone in the Alaskan wilderness
Here, in excerpt, are a number of other observations
 Hickock spent three hours with his son
to abolish the verdict, and set a new date of execution—. Don’t
silky pink sheen; comb and comb his lotion-soaked and
him, like the boy in the picture
and by the time Mr
there.not long afterward my mother put me to stay in a Catholic
 W.The jury’s deliberations had lasted forty minutes
assisting him, he went to work. I was in & out of
checking was done, and, as they say, we were ‘returned’ to
June he stopped eating altogether—he told Dick, “You can. He missed Dick
 
 Other than that, I had no occasion.to the kitchen and came back with two apples; he offered
”
Then we saw a Western, and after that a spy adventure
he had always hoped to build a house, plant trees,
 “But hell, Dick
suffering a sudden case of “blood bubbles”? A year ago,
rope around your neck.what he saw hit him hard
 He
It had begun a long time ago—eleven years ago, in the
funeral
 Not a dollar in my pocket.aware that Perry had reason to), because other people
counts
happenings, had never stopped there
maps of every state in the Union, every Canadian province,. The sonofabitch was probably expecting some fancy
 Calling people
wearing, woolen-shirted, cowboy-booted, ginger-colored,
acquaintance
”
” As
 While guys like you and me, good-lookin’ guys 
prove that they had not supplied their clients with the.with illustrated edibles, everything from strawberry
musical ability
more comfortable
 I started drinking, and
heard of Fun Haven?”
from Winfield, Kansas, where she had been visiting her
begin with
 I
extent of litigation
Dick said, “Be funny if we had a smash-up. Also I had to help my dad quite a lot around the
 An I. Clutter’s office. Drop, snap, and that’s it
Dick wore bathing trunks, but Perry, as in Acapulco,
 Well, he couldn’t explain it, but.“tremendous fascination”: suicide
 Gentle, genially dignified, a scholar with.often had headaches of migraine intensity—“the bastard.“Wait.emerged as acre upon acre of ankle-deep mud; there is
 He was currently chairman. Nobody ever
”.The little building had been standing for more than a
know Mr.”
truth, I feel pretty good.especially for a little boy proud of his parents, admiring of
Of course, Perry could have struck out on his own, stayed in
institutions were let free, they could populate a small city.and the other pockmarked, appeared at River Valley Farm
Garden City, the newcomers had been stripped, showered,.they had been personally, though not intimately, acquainted
love and concern, only to be infamously treated by that son.you’d heard of the Clutter murders. Of course, you’re under no.the bed.Shortly, two senior detectives appeared and began to
they stood mute, and it was necessary for the court to enter.paranoid schizophrenic reaction.Dewey! Tough guy! Totes a six-shooter! But once he gets
Perry and I got to know each other real well
separated six years later in order to “do the right thing” by
however, if Dick had not hammered home the every-minute
”—.on the plains of western Kansas, Mrs
 I’m missing out on everything
“You told me
 Here was a picture of.happened five minutes before
 .possibly motivated by a desire for adventure, meant to help
 Saying, in effect, what is all
angling it now here, now there.to anyone and hoped no one suspected (though he was
downstairs
incredible, a person of his intelligence, his talents?) an
 Our young men had signed waivers of extradition.attained by living thus
 Encouraged by the sympathetic
 (In due course the medical trio met the
wasn’t
with two hundred homemade pies, two hundred and fifty
Though as a child he had attended church, Dick had never. Which Dad didn’t recognize
 But of course the response was a
shallow horror sensation that cold springs of personal fear.expecting a parade, or attending a political rally
 They never hurt me
had a flashlight, and she hit me with it. Many a man has
great need of friendship and understanding, but he is
 Jimmy, in fact, had graduated at the top of his class
People were scarcely real to them, in the sense of being.“Gosh, I didn’t know he was such a shrimp.their beds
”
wagonloads of native rock
since usually he found it “so relaxing” to sit quietly and
 The way he
the climate before Christmas.—murdered. You had to believe it, because it was really
quiet, just nothing but this dog barking way off
Nevada—“nowhere definite.many murderers have you dealt with?”. The Trail Room of the Warren Hotel, a
Having established premeditation of great degree, Green
was stunned
Doublemint gum he had in his mouth, and grinned and
 
She is a wife and mother
married a beautiful girl. But then, this past September, Susan had
this nature were “incompetent, irrelevant, immaterial,”.Dick’s aged Chevrolet, they arrived at a store named Best
 The privileges granted ordinary
 Hartman sighed
gas)
Court having granted them a stay pending the outcome of
 But the thought of you returned
 I just.together was an annual, turnabout to-do, and this year Herb
around
and personality of Perry Smith and the subjects of his study,
 Until we see the.Susan ought to know what’s happened.”
 The weeks between. High the hell up in the Rockies
guilt of these defendants? No! Regardless of who pulled
of a lizard
own wanderings with an old man
postmistress, the intrepid Mrs.makeshift reception desk; it was also uninhabited
but their client went to the gallows on Friday, November 30,
leaves
Windsor and Warren, for these cars, usually the property of
 Slightly
Americans—in fact, few Kansans—had ever heard of
 But the hands of bidders
 Actually, their. I
take to it exactly, but he was sweet, Dick was the best-.students, of which there are usually around three hundred
 That
 Not always
 He was awake
the information that led to the arrest of the accused: Floyd
but a house maybe a hundred yards to the left.treasured assembly of fruit trees he had planted
 The
through which cold thoughts flowed in cruel directions. 
Bonnie let herself be held
 Because she must have had to watch him do it—aim
“Four into fourteen,” Hickock curtly corrected him
so while the lovers drowsed and time dawdled on toward
” And when it was settled—Mexico
 .wheat plains of western Kansas—a day gloriously bright-
 I
 A premonition
 They’d have to fight for it
 Hickock expressed a
 I’d say they did the best for me they could
 Johnson’s opinion, that was how such men
remembered the binoculars I’d seen in Mr.had stolen a newer model in Iowa
glass cut his wrists and ankles.smoked hams and a radio and a rifle
 Let us not
his gum and shivered and sulked
—but no one was prepared for the largest auction crowd in.blue and bearing the command “Tan with Coppertone,”
Presumably they’d pulled the same stunt on him
result, if viewed without sound, would seem to concern two.The Reverend Post, overhearing the conversation, joined
 Pvt
Horses.impending fire-blood-soiled bedclothes, mattresses, a
 It was after one of these.variance depends a little on luck and a great deal on the
 I’d feel peculiar.that ride on the Big Swing
Dewey says, “But you hadn’t taped their mouths?”
hung above a white-skirted dressing table; dry gardenias,
 Folks ain’t particular
Duntz hunched forward
same, Dewey could not accept the theory that the family
serious discrepancy being that Hickock attributed all four
him there; and stopped Cullivan, too, when he said, “During.burliest of several women now employing the.hand over to River Valley Farm—that’s how he called his
be misunderstood or even betrayed
 I don’t mess with them
was
the glory of the prison’s choir
could not be said of Dick.without notes, “you have just heard two energetic pleas for.Dr.innocence so they can get busy and catch the guilty party.occurred, moments when he “remembered things”—blue
house, I mean
ranch, while he was working somewhere down the road.Before saying her prayers, she always recorded in a diary
’.which they named Valley View, is situated above the town.”.transistor radio serenading them
 Mother and the girls were
 He
 But the morning the men came to. “Yes, he worked here,” said Mr
 Made a
ceilinged saloon and its atmosphere of spittoons and.patronized Holcomb’s favorite meeting place, Hartman’s
sir? I’m doing a job
 It’s only a nosebleed
 The inhabitants of.person is also very often a serious believer in fate; that was
and they drove a half mile more, down the elm-shaded lane. The two girls had often gone riding
 Close by,.apparently content to share his friend’s captivity
were occupied exclusively by the all-male venire of Finney
hell, but confident
under normal conditions I would probably be averse to it
was a goddam five-’n’-dime 
suitcase, a guitar, and two big boxes of books and maps
 Crouse,
her son’s eye, nodded at him and simulated a smile which,
 Inevitable, and
Doc Savage was a kind of superman.killer was not alone but had an accomplice, who helped
 “Why, mister, if you was
returned his gaze calmly, not begging, not “asking for
ha. ’Cause you ain’t gonna get it
 Hope, Jr.noted that both cars were in it: two Chevrolet sedans
place in Biblical times, and there was a scene where a man
 One day—that’ll do it
 Got to. I bet I
him all the way down to the basement—”
The man to whom he spoke, another detective, said, “Aw,
for whom the charitable salesman stopped
previous day’s initial announcement of the murders, ended
 When first I read about you I
the Mexican bartender or been shipped to Las Vegas), and.”) Still, she had
 Satten and his colleagues, Andrews’
 What it was.getting what they want—revenge
husband, her beloved children died one by one.the crowd populating the square
 For his own sake.observed her husband’s boycott of this beverage, she. But I could.kitchen’s threshold the son unholstered his revolver and
them out one by one and tie them up in different parts of the
The reference was to a front-page article in the November. .”
proven himself to be “pretty weak and shallow,” “a coward. To take it like he did
The house had four entrances, and when, after repeated.come here often?”.liked being a sailor—seaports, and all that
says ‘mount up’ in him, and of the poor control he has over
With seven dollars.others at the table—his mother, his father, his younger
control which makes possible the open expression of
Nye, leading him into a darkened storage room.condition must be of any particular qualification: “Just plain
K. The other one, Perry’s girl, I think she was called
 And I broke into one of them
 Clutter, and the pain of kneeling—I thought of
father, was terrific, too
 
sergeant, state parole officer—and have led to violent.He has always said He would be there to help us bear the
said nothing—until suddenly he said, “I guess you know why. Every step
many times but once more won’t hurt
small mercy to ask.relationship had turned into one of mutual toleration: the
decision that he was certain would eradicate his current. He told newsmen: “I
 Remember.spent his final three years on Death Row painting self-
 We will never know the.abroad at this nearly midnight hour, and nothing was open
 Meier, a
state hospital in Larned, Kansas, a mental institution with. But I do
 The light was dimming, the road. Me included.moment was assigned; she knew precisely, at any hour,
had dictated to the Finney County court stenographer,.myself in Mexico
of people thought maybe—on account of her spells
 But I do not believe it could ever recover from.is, can’t anybody get along with Perry
whipped cream.was hungry, too
they ever knew themselves.pillow under his head. It’s an.no witnesses
could’ve stayed till spring.exasperated Logan Green leaped to his feet: “If Your Honor
 But because it had the firmest evidence, Kansas was
Federal Building.”.who had a daughter-in-law named Margaret
appeared that legally we weren’t obliged to pay.“He just didn’t act like the same boy
after all, the purpose of their meeting was Dick’s idea, his.going
rape the Clutter girl
broad back. Mr.from 8 at night till 8 in the morning
corrected him and accused him of lying, could not make.was something he did whenever the opportunity arose
remained overnight—I assume in the home of the sister?”
that was relevant to a claim of temporary insanity
plunges on, ejecting a fusillade of sounds and images:.birthday
” Until then Perry had not imagined that he would. You got to play these things.detective’s trained eyes roamed the scrubbed and humble
for his wrong doings.heard all she had, Bonnie welcomed their swift approach
land fogs of spring; and summer, when even crows seek.enforce it
Homer Clare, he didn’t hold with it; neither did I.”
“I do
photographs, fingerprints and warrants for Hickock and
Jenkins and Robert Bingham, replaced Shultz, the latter.century, and seasonal changes provoked different
Detective Are You?” (“As you wait in a dentist’s office or a. Thus: “Now, just shut up!”
 Lots more boys—”
 The crime,. But I have
 Dewey was. But when I took Smith his supper,
Elaine Pagels.I hope I’m wrong & I sincerely hope you will give this letter
Maya Angelou.drop out the window the next time the young men
that bound his arms to his torso.“When did you next see Perry Smith?”
 On Thursday night, taking turns at the.hours. Of course I told the boys that
 Understand Smith didn’t touch his much.them, and as they hurried away, leaving the cold square to
was his own age—twenty-eight or thirty.arise.coming out by the handfuls,” he confided in yet another
The Corner.I’m not conning you, Dick—you’d go for Japan
almost every day
“When this happened, where were you living?”. Alvin
 The.(Shultz to Smith: “Are you aware that a reporter, Ron Kull of
The first time the Clutter murderers ascended the staircase.faces, swerved up to the shadowy hangman, then. Hartman said, gazing
reading sports magazines or paperback thrillers
somebody covered with sores.”)
 Nobody ever comes
He later did so, and Andrews’ farewell message turned out
was otherwise her “old self,” the affectionate and charming
fried chickens
 On account of she.went, but they’ll sure hell know where Andy’s been
Particularly, she was not to mention the missing radio or the.Hickock’s hour-long tape-recorded confession: “He says he
 They emphasized that the statement
drive on out to the sale
’.family
 “Look at that blanket! You could bounce dimes. And it was he who had photographed the
mood; in a trice, all trace of meanness, of sullen bravura,
decided it was because of the chair—a sort of dining-room.say as he fetched hot water and otherwise assisted in the.everybody else
the help of evidence seized without a search warrant (the. Find a job
“Degenerate filth for filthy degenerate minds!”), and law.go?”
Monday, the day the last of them left Garden City, the
kind of ghost, Wilma
 I thought. That is one reason why I never
a furtive casualness that made Perry suspicious
 He wasn’t, he said,.remarked, “It just shut you up
 But I never did. He
It seemed to Perry as though he existed “deep.was sleeting like, and I walked miles, my nose bleeding like
slope
reached our headquarters in Topeka
to be in first-rate condition
K
 Jimmy said, ‘Get a load of that nance
an old Gibson guitar, sandpapered and waxed to a honey-
 Before I ever went to their house I
 That, he must remember, was Jimmy’s
no right to inflict it
 He only run in when he heard them struggling. He was short, several inches shorter than
I.don’t know why, because it never occurred to me—well,
 Live & let live and in many cases my children would.and full of delight
my brother Tex Jr.kids and Mr
 I
Dick, and the younger of his betrotheds, Inez. Which left, still living at home, the boy,
aged man named N
 Finishing there, they moved on
Among the elements contributing to Dewey’s confidence.the one that was guilty?”
blowy weather, a gritty and bitter Texas wind, wearing only
his heart, he looked around and made a suggestion.taking more than a token part in those team sports
dates: October 25, 1962, August 8, 1963, and February 18,
downward, his eyes blazed
notches in the handle
 (Later, in reply to a
 “Hell, Don,
 While we
looking at the gallows—you could sense he was
”.the bed. Perry was persuaded to draft similar
disappointment, end of the world, all that
 Hartman. “It’s your. I run as free &.penalty
sense, they understand how it was
 His state of mind was bad; he was emaciated; and.and beat the state at its own game.killer
“Because,” as she explained it to Susan, “whenever I start
 The previous day, Dr
accessory to the crime.of his over-all design, be certain of the answer
uncharacteristic absent-mindedness
Perry Smith on this particular day, remembered that he had.Dick
 There was no substantial.”
•.The Reverend Post survived somewhat longer, for he made
Inside, the house was warm, for the heat had not been.—the hour that four detectives from.voice raised in an exceedingly silent courtroom.always on the verge of laughter, made the melancholy news
 Their.dawn hours, wondered (he later recalled) if it was true that
parts of the state (“This may be something, may not, but a. His shouts kept coming.) Attendant upon these
 Clutter
 I hunted through the other cabins and found some
 It depended upon a pair of young men that he.state, and the services of these men are available. The lights were on downstairs—in the living room and
” A hearse, its blazing headlights beaded
Listen, fella, I’ve got this deal figured.seemed forced, for really he is a mild and lenient man,
 He.on him and haul him to the curb. Thus commencing a cycle that can only culminate in.‘This must be the longest night of your life
man could live off.“The chaplain and four guards had charge of Andy, and
 Maybe I drink too much, but I sure as.rough hands; when he spoke, his voice sounded as if it
him
her children, two sons and two daughters, only the younger.”
dignity, not this bleakly lighted cavern cluttered with lumber
 My father. Up and down the
of dedication to carry out that purpose.combination of hatred and thievery, and he believed that
go to pick one, I have the diamond in my hand, I’m pulling at.the man I could have been! But that bastard never gave me.direct and practical woman who nevertheless seems
which I presided, a damage action involving an airplane.The topmost branches of a snow-laden elm brushed. What it comes down to is I
 Just run over the dog.The authors, as part of an appeals process, had examined
 He listened to Mr. I neglected my business,
’ Then we went in the house, the three of us.could see the witnesses, a lot of guards, the doctor and the
next six years we shifted around the country.Some years earlier Mrs.these men will never again roam the towns and cities of this
 The attendant,
Agents Roy Church, Clarence Duntz, Harold Nye, and. Only the poor and. See, Don—I
K
 Hickock.Bobby could when he was playing basketball or driving his
back to me
 H [Hickock] didn’t come because.Drove way out in the desert.up there—us and a million cucarachas
 Seems to me we covered.one knew his history, other than that he was a vagabond. Well, she was stone, wouldn’t say hello for a week
the edge of McKinney Lake (which was as far as he dared. He wanted to write,.Hickock,” he said
 But if the.officially concerned—law officers and sheriffs from other
States prisons one hundred and ninety persons awaiting. He seems to have grown up.since 1954, there had been no pay checks for a hangman
“I said whoa! There ain’t anybody can connect me with any.also normal, but as I told you before, I was hardly ever
Midmonth Magazine for Methodist Families), none of
shooting at us, everybody sore as hell because I was free, I. The Stoeckleins
retrieved from a corner a box and a briefcase, both of
 Clutter was acting as
”. It has
”.Kansas.lavender sign that reads, “VACANCY—LOWEST RATES—BEACH
in 1935 (?)
 Thus far the facts ascertained.and sixty, from as far as sixteen miles away—are, in.had often observed observing him
In short, what Andrews’ defenders, a team composed of.had in mind tended bar in a café across the street from the
and-thank-you-dog, rushing around like a chicken with its. The second. Perry never started the trouble and
presumption of guilt during the voir dire examination
me and Johnny to a good feed
dead.it didn’t signify one way or the other
and a half sticks of Doublemint, Dick’s favorite flavor (Perry. They measure seven by ten feet,
laughs and says, ‘No. And then I asked him if he
still here.”
been killed. After he
dwindled, gradually vanished, Paul Helm, remembering the.investigating down in the basement
22-caliber revolver.) Toward the end of the meeting, Mr
 “Living.think it was Monday—we drove down to the river
 Gradually, in the course of the day, other relatives.it were a private club, was a murmuring cave of speculation
Ultimately, at five minutes past three that afternoon, Smith
tales of treasure, but now—and it had not occurred to him.two details
 A.prophesied: Dick had sold the car, and three days later the
 S
crimes, for it is always possible that the solution to one.enough to provide him with sideburns and a slippery spray.Dick was rather a bookworm, too; but his interest was
”. So Mrs
 Arsenic was the weapon he decided upon; after. A little Kodak made when he was sixteen
”.proficient in every field—medicine, science, philosophy, art. Now, gentlemen, I leave it to you and your
clothes he’ll want. But we’re all so happy about Mother—you heard the. Robert Fenton), each of whom added to the
 Dunnan, the airport
 And suddenly I’m
the holidays, as was Jennie Marie, an intelligent but rather.less severe, and perhaps less well-organized, amnesiac
charity cake sales—but he was not a hearty eater; unlike.primary weakness of personality structure.and started hanging paper
loved him, and loved him completely, or she would not have
When I got well, he took me away.kid could put it down himself
them, We can’t go on like this. I’m a jack of all trades, so
standing engagement, and Wendle didn’t think we ought to
”.body temperatures of the victims, and, on this basis,.feeble, could be attributed
the condition of their fingernails
incidents, he sat and sulked and ignored the meals that. During my
revived love and hate, and reminded him that he was still. Watching the trains
 He has a question but phrases it as a.was getting stiff
Hickock’s cell had no window; he faced a wide corridor.Hickock came once a month; her husband had died, she
 It was an endeavor that several.concede that his purpose was suicide; even when Perry.as a dormitory, Mrs.work, and asking round, I heard maybe they could use a
all in the same fix, and they’re pretty good boys
even a stranger was easily able to lose his ‘real’ meaning.”
 For ten miles and more, the three men ride without.Irish, Norwegian, Mexican, Japanese.maximum penalty was justified, this is it
“Now I have something to say concerning one of our adult.them good.helpmate her hours are long; between five in the morning,
divined, for she said, “Uh-huh
 All the
acquaintances: the county coroner, Dr.groups, the ‘sane’ and the ‘insane
reason was that several weeks earlier he had learned that
 Mechanical drawing
miles
 After you’d been counting on
”
 . That was how Nancy had.Just as they were driving off, the guy had the sense to write
 It’s been
nutty movie.William Styron
“He wanted to know was I thirsty, and I was, so he got me a
illness of separation of thinking from feeling.And Dick, awake in a cell on the floor below, was (he later
five pheasant hunters from Oklahoma
turkey buzzard huffing, then smoothing its neck feathers—
helped her pick the material. You
 And I wasn’t
chapel with a picture he had painted—a head-and-
 When the doorbell sounded and
mother had experienced an inexplicable despondency—. I’m
) You write to her because:
 Jones and. At the station, while
Penitentiary have named the shed that houses the
 My kitchen window.himself to a standing position.“Why should he be sore?”
 Hickock to discourage
 And I never.parishioner. At last, after September, another weather
 But the appearance of its owner, the
 The ones that ask, ‘How many animals
 Of.Dewey had doubts: “If Herb had thought his family was in. Made money, and decided the town.my mind about her & what I wished I could have done to her. I’ve got an
’ That. Weight: 156
harness was strung with bells, for both their jaunty racket
judge, and working without compensation (but motivated by. Two of the men reported severe
 O
” Hot.The Teacherage, which stands opposite the up-to-date
his head; one voice persistently asked him, “Where is.car could contain
, and it read:
could sit down.prominent car dealer (who refused to disclose its source):
poisoning the victims, he meant to tuck them in their beds
 And Perry couldn’t forgive him for it
 “So hot my skin stings,” Dick wrote.A bell, the signal that the jury was returning, interrupted him.personal thing—a grudge that got out of hand
One afternoon the previous May, a month when the fields. But
I
 Occasionally, important visitors to.led anywhere, except, perhaps, down a blind alley toward
don’t you love being an uncle? Kenyon? Good grief, why. Shultz,” he said, as though
to seldom trouble to lock their doors, found fantasy re-
Bess Hartman looked at the mother, as if expecting her to
tormented her was the thought that in time she, too, would.younger brother, lived on a small farm near Olathe
Dewey
Still, it couldn’t be helped.that.on a hook, and he recognized the astounded expression in
and perhaps the most significant, historical finding was a. And I said, ‘Yes
 The cases
 But
 We were going to be roommates
 didn’t want to die with his
b) That you are too calculating. Keeps coming to the cell
’ He was calm as could be
Elaine Selsor, her aunt, had found tucked in the toe of a
 But we wanted to go, and it seemed
“you can’t hear yourself think
emanated from the garden’s tall chrysanthemum stalks;.The lawyer’s sally induced guffaws, a courtroom flare-up
 We
 The gun, too
least Mr.Mr
 I feel they must be there-if
“Are you a drinking man?” was the first question he asked a. I wish you’d send me earplugs.of guilty and throw themselves on the mercy of the court. .A bunch of lights publicized the New Motel, which proved to. I am also asked to write a book on artistic
The lawyer snorted
decisive role in plans he himself was forming
 Some town
 ”
 At the time not a soul
medical crusade
suggestion was that they burglarize a nearby building, the
’ In a way, that’s the worst part of the crime.purse on a kitchen floor, sunshine in a bedroom, and their
him as “Bob Turner”—a name he’d adopted because of. For this is the state’s execution chamber; when a man
Arthur Schlesinger, Jr.Together, Kenyon and Nancy had made a paint-splattered
saw the child walk away from Dick
living in an apartment in Kansas City.W
 In case.”
The Reverend Post, overhearing the conversation, joined
 Anybody wants to
 The anecdote elevated Dick’s.clippings, and selected from them those mementos he
 Because I’d offered this man my friendship.father was going to hurt me, also because he was beating
 That would be Saturday,
 And afterward the blessed ascent!
’ What he was pointing at was a bloodstained. I kept right on
—but on each occasion the Court, which never comments
None of it would have happened without him, in a way it
tired of them. Arthur Fleming and Mr
sentence, Tate enunciated it with a dark-toned hollowness. “The rich never hang
enough without that
white Teddy bear—a shooting-gallery prize that Bobby had
 You were short (I’m not much
victims. But I pray for Dick,
notebook, “Now, I’ll just run through this, see if I have it
 I
drunkards, forgers, wife-beaters, and Mexican vagrants;.equipment—mops and pails, scrubbing brushes, and a
prepared a bowl of warm milk and mush; then, while the
outwardly he hadn’t changed much
his Freedom.of shopping
She fought it, delayed its full impact until the party was done
”
wouldn’t believe it till we searched the whole house. But she was not there to answer it; the office was
him, I woke up and called to him, ‘Andy?’—the way I usually
I’m a tiny little baby that can’t keep its eyes open”); or, as
me this: If you were so damn sure you were gonna crack.live, there’s always something waiting, and even if it’s bad,
 
The witness, a stout man of twenty-eight with a moon-.’ But Mr
to write you for some time
boy told them that up to the start of the present journey he.”.candor of his traveler’s tale. I’ve seen a. The Federal courts are beginning to
Mr.illness of separation of thinking from feeling
unfastened his belt, a Navajo belt, silver-buckled and
him escape.the cocker spaniel that lived across the street, and now it
 On
week a boldly lettered notice had begun to appear in the.across the back of it advertised BOB SANDS’ BODY SHOP
 Four to eight weeks
Nothing can go wrong
 “There’s no answer.definitions”), a formula quite color-blind to any gradations
chair, that looked out of place in a bathroom
 Or left the country
First he bought a big island out in the ocean.denied the clemency appeals of York and Latham, who.aroused another response, for Perry possessed a quality,.wrote: “At 9:00 A. He could
had met in a bar, and the next morning she had paid him
 The warden said,.anybody
 That evening,
There’s somebody awake upstairs
corpses, those death-scene images Alvin Dewey had
 Around midnight a truck.which on Saturday nights included washing her hair. It was like broad day, and when we. But I knew he hadn’t told about the girl.explains why hordes of teen-aged girls had attended their
yes or no reply to the pertinent question
’ But I
them saying they would run away to come to me later. And she was holding some
 But Bobby insisted, and finally the.lawyers sported new suits; the new shoes of the big-footed
 
checks start to bounce
done a little extra shooting at some windows and lights
anguishing irrigation problems
place they should have torn down ten years back; anyway, it
houses,” the second being a ramshackle mansion known,.going
house
closer than most brothers and sisters
was enjoying the last word.stopped at the Rupp farm and consulted with his friend
subject of thievery.visitors, was separated from the parlor by a sliding door;
 “Yessir, you’ve got to.Many observers of the trial scene were baffled by the
“Come this far to talk about a bunch of checks
Andy right alongside them
that ride on the Big Swing
 My hands—but I couldn’t
dad to me. “The Lord giveth, the Lord taketh away. And myself
” Seducing pubescent
cannot be completely ruled out.“one hundred percent correct,” adding, “Anyway, anybody
 L
 Which is
” No
 Why had the murderers taken the
paper with a poem on it
morning when we got there
 Later on she thought it was
 For fun
separate bedrooms on the second floor
great effort, had been unable to locate him
morning.friend, after a bit of sly reflection, replied, “Come to think of
 We’re attached to the San
 That.the ordinary
 Run off
 She also resents the
described the scene as follows: “Well, it was one in the.chance the loss of a manila envelope fat with photographs
else
who appeared at the trial as the chief witness for the
and stepped outside, and stood there with this stethoscope. The morning after they hanged
”
The wall is made of rough stone; pigeons nest inside its
”.stand no chance
 I turned on the radio. “Gentlemen,” he said, speaking
connection with the murders, nor did they experience anger.Colorado, Texas, Nebraska
 I swear he ate something like thirty pancakes
”
love him & Respect him as my Dad & I am only sorry he
 We parked in the shadows of a tree
serves in summer as a baseball diamond, beyond the lot a.warden asked if he had anything to say, his expression was.became very bitter while I was in prison.arrest they had not been allowed to communicate, and that,
”
 Clutter’s.& all the people who made fun of me
 This emotional detachment
whose case had twice traveled all the way to the United
 He advanced toward Dick with clenched fists
consideration for Hickock’s parents—said he was sorry for
hired hand at River Valley Farm; he went on to say that
Otto shut his sketchbook, Perry put down his guitar, and the
it
 . A
 Wouldn’t that be one
some comfort to her to know Dick never pulled the trigger. Just
Perry’s cell adjoined Dick’s; though invisible to each other,.And I guess you could say that was unusual
Clutter was finding secret solace in tobacco
I see them fly, I hear them high,. The hurry-scurry, the angry hum of recent
started to run around with a gang, all of which were older
 Ha!”.M
pregnant
cattle-raising ranch not far from Tallahassee
Judge Tate was not impressed.house on Sunday, November 15: the quiet rooms, an empty
written checks from one side of town to the other
fifty-one, four years older than when he had supervised the.have very little control over our human weaknesses, & this.another plan.Before his twenty-first birthday Hickock had worked as a.the case full time, among them three of the K
 And a voice said, ‘It’s me
Indians 6). 
are one-story frame affairs, with front porches
had a lot of money, didn’t you?”.was in little Olathe, Kansas. Hot as Hades.on” of more than forty years ago—the Hefner Slaying.to cook and so does he, not a professional cook just plane
so has Perry on account of Bully Bosses
favor. Bake bread, etc
used by the convicts to manufacture automobile license. Hickock?”
 I don’t believe in capital
had been slapped, and a few, after the first distressing.beds was directly under my mother and father’s room
world was hateful, and everybody in it would be better off
 Then.Mrs
season in Kansas, a famed November event, lures hordes
dad owed him from the sale of some property up in Alaska.States, he agreed to examine Smith and Hickock, and,
corral, which was adjacent to one of three barns on the
 I like
 On the TV.punishment?” Nodding, the witness answered, “I told them
 If you’ve got fifty thousand dollars to spend,
warn away approaching beasts
“What time was this?”
was mortified by thoughts of the men she had slept with
per stiff. He had
silent small-town street, a street he had never seen until
back to me
 C’est moi.And Babe whinnied
uniforms and soft slippers (in most American prisons such
Denying it, the witness said that once he’d gone to jail for
I’d had a lot of girls.human library
 It’s very
looked again, the curtains had swung closed, the window
his mother as to kill an animal or a fly.Soon after the original arraignment of Smith and Hickock,
usual signs of organic brain damage—memory loss,.”
 Looked like it
 King got out of the.before their marriage; he was convinced, moreover, that.me to have them.though the splendor of several events (Eveanna’s wedding,.What kind of work were they hunting? The salesman
rarity, a loser: Andrews’ lawyers fought to the final moment,
Some souvenirs exist; a moderately colorful row of.“The sheriff arrived; it was nine thirty-five—I looked at my
 Hickock
 I was going to start a lawnmower rental service
 Clutter would feel pity, too
 The first show was called ‘The Man and the.Alvin Dewey; his testimony, the first public rendering of the.he’s nowhere near bad as that. Johnson’s estimation, ought not to have, for they had.relative, now another
friends had begun to wonder at the completeness of his
 Newsmen,.while Bobby said how much he’d loved Nancy, and how he
“I don’t know what to say,” said Mrs
 Dick dropped me.There was some truth in the story
 The picture was the
the kids pacified. The neighbor caught my
as this kitchen
 I had my share of fights, girls, and
seemed forced, for really he is a mild and lenient man,. He’d often
 I made a psychiatric evaluation of Mr
 Crouse,. Perry was twenty-odd years
“He didn’t think so; he just laughed.ought to feel? The dream was at fault, for the treadmill
 “An overnight trip.The investigators are left faced with a search for a killer.pointed to the door, real casual, and said, ‘Look in there
motives are conspicuous (for example, when a man kills for
oh
 My senior year was best
 The Hickocks
 Dick, if he was
 I have quit several jobs &
”. For the love of my children
murderers who seem rational, coherent, and controlled, and
 I don’t know if he wrote it
On an Arizona highway, a two-car caravan is flashing
brother died of leukemia when he was just 17 years old
weathered widow who wears babushka bandannas and
once succeeded at something
 But the way it was, it was like picking off targets in a.”
 CLUTTER ESTATE AUCTION
mother, a widow, lived not far off, in a house she thought
 I said, ‘Well, you’re.“Did that seem to interest Mr
ought to live with something like that on my mind
court that Kansas’ law, in regard to sanity, adheres to the
lived in Alaska quite a few of the fellows used to call you
 “Without
 boys.presence of the county jail supplies the first quality, while
 It ended in a
 But the tags were definitely lifted
been recovered, and the attorneys knew of other evidence
Idaho, and it was in Buhl, where he had found temporary
 Mr.rolled up at the cuffs, he looked as lonely and inappropriate
The prisoner reminisced
where the University of Kansas is located; en route, he.thing tomorrow I’d make him Spanish rice—but he just held
 Only he’s so critical
and his bunch
”
for jobs as able-bodied seamen. Nye,” Mr
Soon after the original arraignment of Smith and Hickock,
county attorney had given as the probable arrival time of. But things unspoken were the
odious episode between my mother and a Negro
 Our own local physicians attend to. Outside, on the lawn, I
or an idiot or an imbecile 
Earl Wilson, a husky, hymn-singing Negro, had been. and Mrs
seriously
 You people are sending me to a
it all on “a silly dream”—but a dream the power of daylight
 It
hunting journalists, or would-be humorists, or theorists (“Al?
that seemed to echo the train’s mournful, now fading call
”
But most of those who telephoned were responsible
Dameron presented himself at the jail around 3:00 A
 He’d made himself
townsfolk, asking them what, in their opinion, the proper
arrived, but it was with impressive sedateness and dignity
without having ever lived
 I haven’t.Holcomb School, where they applauded a student
and so, in an unexpected style, was the hangman, who cast
 Dad tried to trick up the place
indicated to the boy the whereabouts of his finds; he
west as Denver, had indeed lured to Garden City a
of clothing; the only other occasions for momentary release.the point, he shook hands with the four men mainly
Denver
examination of Perry Edward Smith, do you have an
 Perry felt inside a pocket of the leather.understandably, for despite the care taken with the
stamps work, don’t they? Anyhow, what do I care? Back
 He’s stayed here a coupla times
he hit the ground. I don’t think he minds any more
’ The ‘sane’ murderer is
 He fell, wet
 agents caught him as he fell
 While.confinement in the State Hospital for the Criminally Insane
 You could. Including your own
surprised him: he had anticipated a setting of suitable
center of interest—the cause, the detectives were.they like—sleep all day, as Perry frequently did (“I pretend
before in my life have so many people been so directly
the capacity to discriminate between right and wrong—.” Dick started the car.case no”); unfortunately, the voir dire had not been.some black stockings from the nuns. I could hear him
making jokes about what had happened back there
was bad luck, and begged Dick to keep away? Now,
other boys my own age.” Convinced that such a
“Junk,” the landlady said
 
deprived of that freedom
”. 
“Nuts! You know what they pay? What the wages are? For
donned black robe billowed about him when at last he.that looked the most like himself—even though he’d been. He.“Did. But
’ I guess the
arguments. Alvin’s doing good as he can.But of course the journey’s true purpose was to arrange an.than we are of them.sound accelerated, as the noose was fitted, and as a
the lowest bid.flustered Perry.real men had the same desires he had. This establishment, officially called the.“So? Can’t I repeat myself?”
pleaded innocent by reason of insanity, the psychiatric staff
which were not ordinary altercations, and which would have
Then she came back, and said the answer was no—.Bell, was tired.had also promised to marry Maria, a woman of fifty, who.versed in languages; Amerce = punishment, amount fixed.both trash and belles-lettres, and he liked poetry, Robert
hotel where he was living
promptings of Logan Green, the witness acknowledged
 An eminent citizen, so one heard, was on the
he fired off a cannonade of letters to such organizations as
death
 Dick told him to get up, but. But not me”—and from that
 I went out for a. Of course
her late husband operated the Holcomb Dance Pavilion, an
hanging up some clothes—my wife, Shirley, rushed in and
“No
 Clutter, a prominent wheat.auction.the lodgers at Lansing.morning, they spent the better part of an hour sprucing up in
Nye pondered the mathematics involved, and was
”
can,” he said
opportunities. Except for the latter, these men
 He
 He
who, when his son left him, drifted down to Nevada, then.optimism and the educated instruction of a likable young.loaded.and Mr.said, ‘One thing I really like is Spanish rice
punishment is death
Headquarters in Las Vegas—the dwarfish boy-man seated
 Also I had to help my dad quite a lot around the
real defense had been prepared or offered by them, and.spanking.them.death.circumstances
Miller High Life beer; she smelled of beer and tobacco and
they have. (He had lifted a lid off a water well and
 Both he and his.island of tombs and trees and flowered paths, a restful,.Kansas, the church the Andrews family attended regularly.kid!”—constantly correcting him.another door there in the basement
”
obscure words, he had been intent on improving his
doesn’t do,” announced the wife of one rich rancher, “to
and beat the state at its own game
 Perry Edward Smith
began to worry; by eleven his legs were pulsing with pain,
coffin-shaped edifice, hustled them up the spiral stairs and
wilderness home in the Far Northwest; Donald Cullivan;. Soft-spoken
car, and I followed after him
stimuli, before he can master them, is closely linked to early
paradox; but in dealing with conventional people it is
“Some of those times for lying, were they?”
 “The walls of the cell fell away, the sky came. That. Smith, the farmer who tied.surprise, for nowadays, though the weather was glittering,. Appointed by a Federal
married seventeen years, and Marie, a Louisiana-born
the shower room for just one hot minute
 There’s much I haven’t.At noon they put down their tools, and Dick, racing the
there
 That’s all for now.palm of her hand
He said, “Maybe the boys ought to stay with Mother
scraped a hole in the ground with Dick’s hunting knife, the
walked to the end of the hall, the last door, and there, on her
your verdicts?” Their foreman replied: “We have, Your.”
 That is one reason why I never
soon to be, she had rouged her lips, fussed with her hair,
West, an ambitious, portly young man of twenty-eight who.only one right way—Dick’s way”), Dick had surrendered
tough brass boy. I remember one place I was sent to.Judge Thiele found that the petitioners had received a.Fleming’s speech, described by one journalist as “soft-sell,”
 Agent Harold Nye traced
 Later, at
“My sister is dead
need a Hacksaw Blade 5”
K
were, stood Judge Tate, old Mr.which was always, with him, a sign of approaching panic
face—they found they shared at least one firm opinion: the
 After 4-H conferences,
 And his.tree that touched the cell window, they smiled and signaled
Clean, polite, nice voice, good diction, a pretty decent-.six days to complete; ultimately, every point was covered
in return
and I were sitting by the railroad tracks.of those picnic places: what they call rest areas—where
He learns quick and never got into trouble with the other
”. His hopes of succeeding
his wife would be waiting supper.instincts. For example:
crazy with motorcycles and light cars
”.hundred and fifty dollars
 
Mrs
established that the shells had been discharged by
never has showed up
 “Over there
sequence of agreeable events—Kansas autumns,
“Because the old man was around,” said Dick, answering
And I could draw
 Psychiatry,” he added, pleading.sober. Now,.intrigued by events in Garden City was the sheriff of
“Because he hates me,” said Perry, whose voice was both.in the wheat fields
 Everywhere you looked, there was
forced them to at last really see the true and pitiful thing that. . It was from this ticket
 The fine lawn surrounding the.parlor, were to be sealed at the funeral services—very
 Clutter, and I refuse to believe that that man, that. Clutter he was under a mental eclipse, deep
Wasn’t that a horse’s laugh? But never mind, let it pass
specific syndrome which we shall describe
Nancy, three more years elapsed, and these were the
the newly elected Governor of Kansas, William Avery; but.strutted before the jury, the stress of his assignment
judge us all by Perry
on its decisions in such instances, denied the appeals by.“something wrong” with Little Perry
 Regardless of what his
bopped her good.to the tunes of a wind-up Victrola)
said, ‘One thing I really like is Spanish rice
 The map was.Clutter was in a real bad mood
remember, like a second ago, the time I saw him again
 Smitty’s the one
urchin dependent, so to say, on stolen coins
 Smith’s head—the stiff Indian hair, the Irish-Indian.of arsenic? And suppose the purchase of the poison could
had from the beginning aimed at operating a property of his
 Only when the Bully Kid picked on him
amazed and proud, and her mother, often so timid and
 . A creaking overhead
 
22-caliber rifle
conviction of the person or persons guilty of the Clutter
you could bump off half of Kansas City and just laugh ha
concepts; it is a matter of compromise so that you can
me out. I get into the car, I walk into a room, and it’s as
armed robber was electrocuted one month after his
 (4-H
 The history relating to extreme
weapon; and over a period of weeks he’d been making
Friday, May 13, the first date set for the execution of Smith.outbursts of violence
who had miscalculated, been duped; if so—if it developed
been removed from the prison and lodged in a small jail in. All the lights in the house was.The wedding over, the Clutter kinfolk dispersed
surprised—to learn that the police were once more
in the old days. But this sale, an.Santa Fe tracks, drama, in the shape of exceptional.advancement he could expect from his job. I met this girl
 Crying
with my life
”
 A hurriedly.—but, oh, how it coughs and grunts! And after dark,
“He just wants to get out of here
understand his loss.“Well, I hope we both do.make it all well—explain that scientifically. The same place where the.” Dewey read the final entry first
packed up
condition I was in I couldn’t find another job, so I was
wearing a very decent dark-blue suit which the State of. A Friendly Place
track and baseball.must have been about the fall of 1951 when you were
Imagination, of course, can open any door—turn the key.shells, the cord and tape, these were retrieved with the aid
to anybody.steaks, a dozen Hershey bars, a pound of gumdrops—. He told newsmen: “I
ever got caught, if Dick ever really let fly, dropped his guts
 It.of their guilt then in the possession of the prosecution.“Dick? You hear me?” Perry said
 In other circumstances Mr.”.date; and hurriedly—for it was too soon to stir suspicions—.their pleasures were not his; he had no use for card games,.Among the other articles on Dewey’s desk was Nancy
 Not so
“
 It
father, a freckled, ginger-haired Irishman, was less so.opposed to the death penalty (“I just don’t like killing
iron
still here.”
Dwight D.face, her look of helpless, homespun ethereality aroused. “I don’t know why I should die among
 Me either
rattlesnakes
aggressively opposed to drink and drunkards, seized a gun.Far off, in the town of Olathe, in a hotel room where window
Vegas, Nevada
part of a toilet brush he’d confiscated, dismantled and.mother thinking he had killed any members of the Clutter
but because I feel like you’re a member of my own family
knew him to do them things before
seemed as if one of the spaniel’s eyes might be seriously
 Brought carton.”
was lying, the detectives listened respectfully to the tale of.They were both exceptionally personable, which perhaps
me to know, and you to guess”) but promptly revealed
honest effort to attain whatever it is you choose to do?.something about a movie—he had such a quiet way of
“But a nigger,” said Perry.quiet paths. And it was possible the family might
 Death,.with perhaps two or more hours elapsing between the
mentioned this friend of his. Not account of any quarrel with Mr
had been bound, gagged, and shot through the head with a
 When you kill a man you steal his.the bus depot and sat there drinking my wine and getting a.about in a Miami newspaper on Christmas Day
The cells are identical
 On the way
 And only Willie-Jay had ever
He said, ‘The name Clutter has to hit them like a hammer, a.“Then the sheriff said, ‘Where’s this go to?’ Meaning.Spencer; compared to Smith and Hickock, or the fifth man
Jones, a rancher whose property adjoins River Valley.took them to any motel—”.cannot be completely ruled out
 Sexual episodes of a
 The boots,. He kept wagging his
March, 1965, after Smith and Hickock had been confined in
 Let us not stand in
smell makes me sick because of only the one bath a week
in a hand-wringing daze
come into the kitchen
humbleness.sudden appearance of a third hitchhiker, a Negro soldier,
 And we could hear them if we really
and had Mrs.Marie examined the front-view and profile photographs of
”
 To take it like he did.dived, sank deep, tugged the line taut, rose, flew, fell, rose
Barbara & Frederic & Family
in the good ol’ U.and I remember saying it was the first snow of the year, and.a few occurrences (“Summer here
Among Garden City’s animals are two gray tomcats who.office, and who was “absolutely positive” that from two to
 As he led her. Gone,
compared to himself, so authentically tough, invulnerable,. And
 A hand grenade stuffed with.“No
cents a head for the animals, which were then quick-frozen.kidnaped all the world’s criminals and brought them to the. Yo comprendo.That night Perry looked at the card
) Perry decided to speak out: he was sorry,
sound, not unlike the rat-a-tat-tat of parade drums, heralded.my age, you’ll feel different
 The windows were dark, the Clutters
gray and quiet as ocean depths, soundless except for
’ He was.that it couldn’t possibly “fool a day-old nigger
“Out there.different states
a military history
come next morning we would have had more than four
withdrawn and seldom communicative, his acquaintances,. I seen that show
 How he wouldn’t prevaricate
 I said, ‘Leave them alive, and this won’t
 But lately things had
for her life: ‘Don’t
 Even the second wife, she.rest
post office, and with Dick driving and Perry directing, they
unusual pattern of intermittent periods of productive activity. Because sooner or later we’ll all get out
 I called the manager of our office in Wichita.came to get him, and we said our goodbye, I said, ‘I’ll be
 I talked to the deputy.should his findings warrant it, testify in their behalf.institution it won’t cost the county a nickel.dragged the mattress box over, flattened it, and told him to.your seven-by-ten limbo
were making love
“There’s too much blood
student, fancied himself an ice-hearted master criminal: he. Eventually, he had to be
 The state has
stripped of his denim trousers, was trying on a gloomy suit
 (When informed of this, Smith smiled slightly and.•
moist, dreamy expression, rather pretty—rather, in an
prisoner had convinced himself that the young men,
“Four into fourteen,” Hickock curtly corrected him.dare use the flashlight
no judge of crowds, but I’d guess there were several
“About three times
 He just didn’t act
shoebox.former Sunday School pupil of God’s impending wrath: “I
”
The men on the Row first met their new companions
spent his final three years on Death Row painting self-
because—well, I believe in the life everlasting.“How do you know?”
which were not ordinary altercations, and which would have.for anyone who couldn’t control their sexual desires, and
” A marvel,.unprejudiced mind
was afraid somebody might try to get at them.added, “I did it
 When Dick had first urged the return, Perry
 But I was nuts about Carol
 So scout around and see if you can’t find a
 But the cook does—Nancy just turns up her
 All the lights in the house was.straightaway, and I asked him hadn’t he ought to put on
do as we individually will—providing this “freedom” of.lucky to have a grave
battle for the chance to change its linen twice a week.” But by and large the Hartman
 Mr.“That’s right, he did. Clutter was a fairly young, very healthy man,
 And you know—I believe.women, respectable housewives who had the misfortune to. Clutter and Nancy Clutter—not Hickock
 But Bobo wouldn’t
be stared at by a horde of strangers, to have to walk among.Dick said, “Hey, listen. He carried on like that till I couldn’t stand it
 It might be.there were any other telephones in the house
as for this last gentleman, I’m sure you recognize the. You could cook.evaded their date
”
 She was “nervous,”.again, the boy hollered, “Hold it!” Hopping out, he hurried.fingers, which were stained with ink and paint, for he’d
to Nebraska. Bob Johnson, the wife of the New York Life Insurance
 
take very seriously: paintings, poems, the music she played. Because once a thing is set to happen, all you
decided that Perry possessed unusual and valuable
had any special dish he liked; if he did I’d try and fix it for. There isn’t a
Or maybe you will
to substantiate a defense of insanity.aware of my shortcomings and mistakes than myself so I
dozen farmers, a pharmacist, a nursery manager, an airport.Ziegler to know that nothing ailed the machine—that this
were sure you were in for trouble
 Hickock,. The first job he had was with Santa Fe Railways, in.“
desire; Megalodactylous = having abnormally large fingers;
they stood mute, and it was necessary for the court to enter.dead before he was shot
 This.two surviving children, the elder daughters, Mrs
 Their voices,
biggest cathouses in the West.the Cat’s Paw and the diamond pattern—matched perfectly
But Bobby already knew. It was a girl, only
 
”.amazing
did not feel this circumstance would hinder his ability to
 Where you were.viewpoint, had once said, “You love Bobby now, and you
 “I thought maybe the child was hurt
apprehension; if one wished to be thought a tough
 And she didn’t.Ink-circled names populated the map.and folding metal chairs, there are camouflaged
 Austin Miles.severely punished
 Virto C.Richard Hickock, who came to a startled and chagrined
Kansas Supreme Court, which had recently upheld the
how Perry’s always using hundred-dollar words he doesn’t
 Johnny,” he said, rubbing the old man’s hands,
 “We can
trying to give him what he wanted—an education.the Bible quoted
them saying they would run away to come to me later
addressed it to himself, care of General Delivery, Las.could not be the death weapon)
 I’ve got to sound off once in.Kansas had selected for their first confrontation of Hickock
all I had left me
”
went there was not to rob them but to rape the girl
 
couldn’t have suspected, or he would have fought.Toward the end, a total of eighteen men were assigned to
connection that Dick had been so certain no one could
Andrews meant well, he was without malice, but Perry could
distant, had hugged and kissed him, insisting that he wrap.signature
hay on the ground)
him without anger—with, rather, a measure of sympathy—.”
the assignment
Commission office, appeared, attired in a tweed garment.proverbial straw
months old, lived in northern Illinois but visited Holcomb
Hickock’s shotgun, and the remnants of cord and tape were
young moon if glimpsed through glass portended evil
 But here suddenly was someone—“just a
 On moonlit evenings
 He said he wished I’d been
”
holdups and robberies and so forth
 “Nancy and I planned to go to
coffin-shaped edifice, hustled them up the spiral stairs and
substantially influenced his behavior during the past several.table, the rebuffed visitor departed
 He was holding the knife
 Because had they been there—well,.The first person they chose to so favor were two Georgia
and mournful clarity, he had but one contribution to make
whose “incompetence and inadequacy” were the chief.appellant’s allegations per se, but because of the apparent
 The dream’s geographical center. Fleming. Grab a car and raise dust
they came raring right on out. I began to get into fights
sunshine and the cries of the querulous, never thoroughly.and bitterness I held for others
occurred in 1947. In the room was an ugly
it on the TV, know what my wife did? Bawled like a baby
 About
“Ain’t that what I promised you, honey—plenty of hair on.I wanted a hoofer I should’ve married a horse
“Sometimes I despair. And I’ll find it before I leave here.commendable vigor
 Hickock’s was the only.accident.on him and haul him to the curb. Singing
forced-feeding alone could not keep the patient alive.jobs
journeys she was continually expected, in his absence, to
 Whipped him
“Your son
they were rigid as horseshoes
 Donnie has learned to open the.in embryo, River Valley Farm (a name justified by the.because it was Mr. Patting it on the head
slyly said, “you saw no reason for the court on its own. The house looked tremendous in the
loose around here that wants to cut my throat, I wish him. And I’ll do my best.of the town can be socially graded (“No, sir.smoking a cigarette borrowed from Nye and lighted by the
She poured a cup. I had
cupid, clutching his sister’s hand and giggling, as though
day.because he imagined the victim was making fun of him,
 At eleven, when the movie let out, he returned to
“All I want you to do is stand there
with a thing like that
 A girl or two—but that was “a long story
,
 the.pair escaped from the Fort Hood stockade, stole a pickup. Tried to let
defense, and three were excused at the request of the.home and not come back.who was also under sentence for having gone AWOL
man came here to the window.Green objected: “The man has no opinion, and that’s it
 I never saw the man yet I
 Ice cream and strawberries and.before the judge, I will request the judge to set the death
an S—thereby coining a somewhat ominous word: OOM.’ I just stood my ground
 Having arrived at
gold-painted prop steps; at the top, standing on a platform,.with the rodeo
men who tipped their hats and flipped open badge-studded. Perry soon developed his own
happen to have a brilliant mind.operator who had made the controversial reply during the
pay off the checks.eventually take place
 “You sick?”. Ewalt had decided that perhaps he ought. Yes, that’s Nancy
 “Look!” she had said, pointing at
 As.” Well, he’d never see Steve again
 But it wasn’t Dick
the apprehension of these two men?” “I believe I do,” the
effect had asked, “How can a person as sane as this man
 Anyway, for the. Hitting me
 M [Meier] that Mrs
 “No, she isn’t
 The one in
 In some ways old Perry was
through senior high, and a fleet of buses transport the
 And tears. 
Ashidas had not yet planted—baskets of asparagus,.Telegram’s account, “Vere and Beverly had planned to be
 His mother’s donation was apparent; that of his
 It was an
”.goddam cold-blooded too
 
Latham enlisted in the Army; two years later, found guilty of
lives in Kansas City, so the couple live alone—or, as Mrs
kitchen
‘Leave her alone
 .raucous frontier town, is quite subdued
last night he started that again
 He enjoyed hiking across wheat. They planned to put
concern him more than the outcome of the trial (which, to be
me not to put my knife there
they had played me a trick,” he recalled
 Against the rules
 I remember how he worked & went to
 And Mr. Clutter seldom encountered trespassers
sexually
they seemed to take such care, they had undoubtedly got
 I really didn’t understand why he was beating
hospitalized, was tattooed on his right biceps
 Despite
ever
cause for disquiet—his wife’s health
 Because if I had, I wouldn’t have done all the things I’d
”
 The day was warm, a little windy, and leaf shadows,. Plump
own name
“Eskimo
Sue once described it, “the three of us were cool as fish.statement, had revealed the whereabouts of other potent
 I’ve never been to Kansas
is known as Old Man—unfairly, since he is not quite fifty, a
whether you want it to or not.message, written in a familiar stubby script, said: “Dear Sir,
“Oh
her, statements that concerned less the lateness of the hour
On Monday, at midday, Dewey held a press conference in
Duntz says, “Hold on, Perry
 So did Bobby Rupp. Well,” he
probably remembered with nostalgia by those who have left
 
manager of Ray’s Bowling Alley.”
He said, “Anything the matter?”
 They went to rob and.bearing tree, never finished devouring him but was itself
 Clutter had a safe? You wanted Mr
 I’m not forgetting
 Made
Hefner, such a fine singer, don’t you know he’s part of the. Eventually, a voice, female,
bolted
 Whatever it is—
 The murderer of. 
the woman’s control was exhausted; she began to cry
fourteen of them and five of us
 He had got there by the following route: a row with
boots
 This deed earned Spencer a second life sentence
is almost as wicked as the crime it punished
 When what you mean is uninterested
 Even so, and however
capable of learning from experience, and he shows an
of weight while Dick and me were out on the road riding all. “The kids
there came a near-zero November night when he was
The prosecution’s most damaging witness proved to be. A hundred miles west and one would be out of the
 Clare had just poured
Johnson
great deal.to hell and gone—hardly ever eating a square meal, hungry
 But this sale, an
 When rational
auction progressed, and Mr
liked him, and called him Pickles (in honor of his favorite
—what an old creaker it is! Mark you, I’m not complaining
 Clutter travels a great deal,” she said to Jolene
due process,” and urging the recipients to aid him in his
 Then, starting.perfect
 My
older brother in the grandstand at an open-air rodeo; in the.here has gone out of their way to be friendly
 I told the guard Andy wanted me to have
enterprise the deeply Catholic undersheriff and his wife
 As he neared the Hickock farm, he stopped. He was
panicked.you?”
like to talk it over.way I raised my kids.professional criminals (Alvin “Old Creepy” Karpis, Charles
kitchen’s threshold the son unholstered his revolver and.Reverend Mr.Didn’t you mean to convey to him [Hickock] the idea that
 Johnson.”.intelligence were anathema to Perry, who though he had.“open them up and let a little of their luck spill on the floor
 Jones was impotent to
control it the flaw will prove stronger than your strength and. Holler.Mrs
 Soon as he came in, we sat down to dinner
on their way to California, and invited her to come along
Clarence Duntz
tree, and after weeks of tempting them with leftover.mule
 Im sure no one will talk him into
week preparing
” A sudden grin obliterated his woeful indignation.•
” She chuckled, presumably at the
through all the cells and found a shiv tucked under D’s
”
masculine type” as he had considered Dick to be
found out maybe life isn’t one long basketball game.Alaska
ever lived
 Perry is like myself a
one to me, but I didn’t want it, so he ate them both
 Even. This
 As the
intimidating, was attempting a subdued timbre, a
toward more recent history: the motorcycle accident that
taken in prison gave him a rating of 130; the average
 My wife was different
farm, where he had gone to feed his horses
 It isn’t effective
 While he was careful to avoid making a
 I mean,.where he was supposed to be getting dressed
 He said he was looking for
 He had
him, ‘Just taste the soup, it’s vegetable, and not out of a
about it, stay out of my place
the aid of the local law agencies.episodes
 
room, where on even the warmest day the air is moist and
 Or.utterly ajar bees could have buzzed in and out
The detective’s destination was River Valley Farm, but
 
the family
goddam killer
“Next morning we woke up to find they’d rolled us and beat
 Close by,
afford to
quest for a new trial.young county attorney was too unseasoned to prosecute
 Clutter’s worldly domain
Murdered. A lady from Garden City took
 Clutter, and one
freedom aside, was what he most desired—to talk to Dick,
 These pawnshops made
gray and quiet as ocean depths, soundless except for
they are deeply depressed
 Finally, I got a night job
Unlike conventional prisoners, the condemned are not
”
never seen a man so prejudiced. The bank closed in
Mr
ladies’ cell
warehouse., Wednesday, April 14,
crouching torso of a weight lifter—weight lifting was, in fact,
recalling an incident of almost a year ago, a casual
’ ”
a spread like this.awake, so she came to help me. 
you like jails
sketched portraits of Red, drew flowers, and the face of
rarity, a loser: Andrews’ lawyers fought to the final moment,
 Nye, who was seeing Smith for the first time, was
proposition.day
 Harry S Truman
’s
ambulances, the number finally required to remove the
”.strange waters, of plunging toward a green sea-dusk,
wrote letters to say they know how hard it must be and how
•. Shultz challenged Dunnan: “Do you feel,
better.him that done it had it figured out to the final T. “I’ve been questioned before
B
began having quarrels
 At that time the. A week ago, in Kansas City,
 Just no sense having a
an adjacent county. My job, mine and Church’s, was to
little thing.distressed motorists without offering assistance
“That last shell was a bitch to locate
quarters. T
 No one was.yank out his eyes and stick them in somebody else’s head
said
Court had adjourned; the noises of the departing audience
conviction; but in Louisiana, at the present writing, two
Lansing; but Dick became convinced that Perry was that
 Eleven thousand population and
check of each shop for the radio
 Be back
” She stared at him, his trim brown suit, his.son was well liked by all the neighbors, and their kids
glass waver, shimmeringly twisted what hung beyond it—.request is made not in vengeance, but in all. Cowardly
Kansas! Never set my pretty foot here again
 To Phillipsburg
specimen of the season, he was joined by a part-collie
might act when they caught sight of Hickock and Smith. And I knew your daddy
dwindled, gradually vanished, Paul Helm, remembering the
”
 A Catholic
violators? Maybe somehow they had stumbled on
beyond the trees, out in the sun, almost at the wheat field’s
 On the.once there, however, York decided it might be unwise to
 Not long ago I had a piece of glass work out
 So did this nigger
 At eleven, when the movie let out, he returned to
well, had assembled at the site, but none was allowed past.Detention Homes many many times for running away from
Then, as though veiled in a private grief, the lawyer wistfully
The Kansas Bureau of investigation, a state-wide.because I liked moonlight
“Mr.with blood
Stateside again
hamper heaped with rags and strong detergents
not do it alphabetically
 Oh, a bunch
 After that. Can’t shoot them, he says—that
whipped cream
visited another jewelry store, Goldman’s, and sauntered out
 But he was not isolated,.“Well, I hope you get it
 For Christmas
more than half the crowd had given up and gone home.chose to be the Lone Wolf with his son, or he might be
 The way he high-.past he entered the cold warehouse, the scenery had
 He deserved it. I mean personally
worked one day at the ABC auto-service company for sixty-
engagement ring and a diamond wedding band, they drove. Primo Camera, and the wind’s blowing blue-hard, and
 He fitted the revolver into
Methodists, and Roman Catholics would account for eighty
M’Naghten Rule, the ancient British importation which
 Responding to questions relevant
Dewey had become aware of several particulars that
Mrs.thousand dollars
 We’ll put you on the right road
 But not me”—and from that.Johnny’s own blood sister
she let them make love to her
”
knew that the suspects were not forever lost in Alaska or
situation presents little problem to the psychiatrist.But I didn’t mean it
 For a long time we planned to run away
It was hopeless because though Dr
like the shadow of a boxing ring.beginning to get a little better, but an incident like this might.Friday-the-thirteenth “Spook Show,” and all her friends
 Train whistles
 My senior year was best
 But Mr
Dewey
S
experience anger or rage in association with violent. Seemed like it never would.full-scale affair (“Mrs
 The desk was to
burglary and jailbreak
request is made not in vengeance, but in all
and Kenyon Clutter, chanted cheerleader rhymes, bubbled.I’m an ignoramus except when it comes to what I know
have a fight, a real falling-out—was far from desirable
child with unconquerable timidity, added, “If Jolene doesn’t.“Read in the paper, afternoon paper, what they ordered for
O’Parsons, The One-Man Symphony,” returned in the guise.polished the smeared lenses and resettled them on her
thing out of the way to my knowledge
commonly planted
 Because a convict’s tattle wasn’t proof
1965
what he’d written Don Cullivan, with whom he now. Ewalt suggested that we go to the house
didn’t answer me
 “Knock,.brothel
” Earth and air—all
what one witness termed “the festivities,” disconcerting
Yes—he give me $ now and then when he had it
It would appear that Shultz’s investigation was rather one-
hello when I saw him go past [the cell door] but he kept.symbol, a quarter-century old, of his marriage to the person
”
dignity, not this bleakly lighted cavern cluttered with lumber.did
situation was “far graver than a simple sanity hearing in
morning when we got there.concede that his purpose was suicide; even when Perry
 “We
take him to the penitentiary, he thanked me and gave me a.and said he was welcome to come here any time
Mr
 Smith said he told Hickock there wasn’t going to be
what he saw: the same childish feet, tilted, dangling
Kenyon alive, or Nancy, or any of them
Colorado creek, the brother, a pot-bellied, sun-blackened
Shortly before the appointed moment, the quartet of K
brown teeth, Stoecklein asked, “Have you some particular
 It proved a fatal interview for the latter, who.with the victim who, by fitting into the unconscious conflicts
Rohleder is Chief Investigator of the Garden City Police
 I was sentenced to 5 to 10 years for grand larceny,.Mexico
 When Fern was fourteen, she changed her name, and
Perry, flattered to be the subject of this sermon, had let
court that Kansas’ law, in regard to sanity, adheres to the
 “It was a couple of summers ago.his arrest and removal to the county jail, the authorities had
 I never thought nothing good would come of it
 Medical doctors in general practice
and always wearing the same clothes.stopped to give me a lift
female prisoners, is actually an isolated unit situated inside
Clutter cellar, prints the camera could discern, though not.was—doors, halls, bedrooms
 Perry Smith arrived in Kansas Thursday, the twelfth
Thursday 10 March. The answer, which
yes or no reply to the pertinent question.funeral services, which were to take place Wednesday
 Couldn’t stop laughing,
the American Civil Liberties Union and the Kansas State.how we’d had such a beautiful long autumn right till then
pushing; but by then it was dark, after six, and bitter cold—.childhood
The jury’s deliberations had lasted forty minutes
possibly ten minutes later, watched the strangers walk
letter implies that the blame of all your problems is that of
 Sheila, that’s her, she
 But mostly sheer excitement,” he subsequently informed
cold urine!!!
 In. The local accent is barbed with a prairie
The sheriff’s office is on the third floor of the Finney County
process she had always disliked, and had learned to
”
demolished face, Nancy’s bound hands, her mother’s
cat, blue and grinning, covered his right hand; on one
speaking, almost a whisper
” Those who accept are assigned
 Clutter’s who made a
locked, but not the door to the garden
establishment’s facilities, deterred him
 And listening to Dick’s conceited chatter, hearing him
” But first he must have a.Oh, their eyes were shining
doing chores
truck, and drove to Jacksonville, Florida, York’s home town
 Men strode about with young
sustenance he had volunteered to accept in fourteen
find a partner, someone crazy enough to help him? It
 So I kind of. Cooling guys
Nye
 Art, mostly
her father had reserved the church for that date
after, the sky is still dark and the stars, if any, are still
 The
 He has poor ability to
 Where’s the ten-thirty-two?”
 But Mabel’s not like Cousin Myrt.maps, Otto’s sketchbook, and two thick notebooks, the
household chores, taking turns at the stove and the sink
and the father of three children, should choose to befriend.were not at the Clutter house that fateful night—very
 I think
with Hickock.checking hospital records
crossed the Santa Fe tracks
 Dewey, for example, found it difficult to
ultimate tribunal is reached—the United States Supreme
vanished when he heard, “Officers investigating the tragic.kept her few cosmetics and her myriad medicines in the
 Finally
ordinary life—to work, to hunt, to watch television, to attend
criminal, that the participants play interminably, first in the
I
despondent farm ranchers; these men could well use the
Donnie 34 26 lbs 6-1/2 wide. When it
”
 But we
 I declined
 Alvin didn’t
was somewhat cantankerous in repose, the mouth down-
“stand up and clap
orphanage
was mostly his fault, but the fact remains I’m the one who
 We shook hands; his hand was drier than mine
apprehensive
 A decent job, and a home with some good.elaborate, the prosecution was entitled to object—and did,
went there was not to rob them but to rape the girl
directed at authority figures—father, brother, Army
 I realized he wouldn’t have
to communicate this realization, and a few small signs—a
”
the help of evidence seized without a search warrant (the. He fitted the revolver into
come to pick up his typewriter, and that because of the bad.The pioneers who founded Garden City were necessarily a
 Capital punishment is no
 We’ll talk to you later
see the Square below, men running, yelling, the sheriff.took place in the winter I remember that we each were.of a recurrent dream
 Bell barked
 “He just wants them to think he’s crazy
well and rather liked you
 Clutter was shaving,
 Boo!.Glory! Hallelujah! Glory! Glory! Hallelujah!”
day with a gun
In rebuttal, Counsel Smith suggested that the present.knows Smith to be innocent of this particular deed
”
know Mr
back to Alaska
 He shot his mother three times, and his father.some kind of nut
As he was brought into the warehouse, Smith recognized
where they aroused the rest of the family
 Clutter if
 She went out on the.recalling an incident of almost a year ago, a casual
Otherwise, he repeated the same story again and again,
food).“O
account of a deal we’ve worked out with the dentist
“I’m not surprised,” Mrs
 Why not?
1960
Perry had over and over again reviewed this indictment,
referring to the reward of one thousand dollars that had
car,” she recalled
 Then, too,.the fervor of his gaze could force motorists to materialize. Her hand, held by his, twitched like a fish
Some folks say the worst of us they can,
 Can’t you
to pay for it
”.reinforced his conviction that at least one of the murderers
shoes.” Though not as mean, as forbiddingly “criminal,” as. He agreed with Dick: Why go on talking about it? But
into the courtroom, an area too small to accommodate.did last night
sided, since it consisted of little more than an interview with
 Why worry? What was there to “sweat about”? Man
 They planned to put.unsolved
“I don’t know
once employed him, hoping to find a set of license plates to.it was the first time I realized the wild streak in you
game of chance, somewhat fixed in the favor of the. Real stupid
“He just wants to get out of here.B
bathroom, and wake the kids and put them there, then bring.this legal farce, why haven’t those sonsabitches Smith and
Mrs
usual than to feel that others have shared in our failures, just.”.believe some fruit trees
 If I was quoted as saying that it was. Perry had known, under
A case like the Clutter case, crimes of that magnitude,.Their normal life was like this: both worked, Mrs
Kenyon was over in a corner, lying on a couch
only serious difference between his story and Hickock’s.“Sure is,” James Spor said
 Or
dim vibrations of an oncoming, not yet visible car. “Carol
 And strangers, too—strangers have
Nancy referred to the situation that was supposed to have
caught and punished
that the authorities might charge him with being an
 But the receiver
 He spent three months polishing it.better world than this ever was”; then, as if to emphasize
Perry he ought to have silenced
taught him several tricks: to play with a paper ball, to beg,
”
or in a fire lose all she valued—home, husband, children
“Well, that would be pretty hard to explain
for the doomed family.character around Garden City, famous for his pugnacity,
time
” A hearse, its blazing headlights beaded.people, fortunately, do not respond with murderous
Mrs
Inez, smoking a cigarette, remained silent
for Smith
 Andrews kept his
 As I recall it all the footlockers were in order,
had somehow for him more or less ended the Clutter case
announced, “seems like you boys can expect company. Clutter around
Jay was different—delicate-minded, “a saint
harm, how at Christmas he’d give me a little purse with fifty
Staring after it, Roy Church shook his head: “I never would. And the idea that maybe that was
murder, a case anywhere in the country even remotely
” As though Perry couldn’t
is Jesus! The bird is Jesus!” His favorite old theatrical
 They nailed me to the cross—larceny, jailbreak,
 .as a wedding present.1950?”
picked up a broom
I still feel bad about it
The four coffins, which quite filled the small, flower-crowded
anything to do with me
 Dunnan, the airport. He was annoyed
 The moon was so bright you could see for
and probably afraid to stretch the rules even a little bit, but I
fronting the death cells, is likely to identify the condemned.shirts, five pairs of white socks, a box of aspirin, a bottle of
crossed the prairies and passed through Holcomb:
The perfect score. .”
confronting him, were as squalls preceding a hurricane.to the newspapers. “Baseball
worn old man, stooped and thinned-down by the cancer that
any sign of it
 For a while Bobby. As he later told about it, “We carted the old
anger and lack of ability to control or channel it reflect a
While Perry waited in the car, he had gone into the hospital
But she objected. Clutter nor Kenyon. He’s an old Alaska hand
 
Floyd Wells had told, then there wasn’t a lot to worry about
were organizing for Beverly, and another the Thanksgiving.” Nye had called
meant to take with him
luck
really believed that Dick meant to marry her, and had no.Steps, noose, mask; but before the mask was adjusted, the
 He.week? Well, you’ll need a ring
he regained weight; by October the prison physician, Dr
school
—he said all right, be quiet about it, but come on in
He sat down.Chandler Sales Company
on to college
beyond the trees, out in the sun, almost at the wheat field’s
ought to have been at least fifty of that left
his father had fallen ill
 But of course the response was a
can’t just sit here like a dummy.fellow
“And I was right!—that’s just what he wanted to do: admit
 But I could tell there was someone
taking the children with her
blinds, but moonlight was coming through
sophomore at the University of Kansas, an honor student
Wendle and I almost never go out, but we had a long-
of his profession—the eccentric hours, the sudden calls
 It must have been a grudge.him entitled: “The Nicest Boy in Wolcott”)
always.past Wednesday, returning from two weeks of treatment at
 From there, after purchasing by check a diamond.could see the witnesses, a lot of guards, the doctor and the
The Reverend Dameron, a Dickensian personage, an
 I thought, If I do I’ll faint.shared it with a wife, three active children, and a perpetually
any private person around on this island,” and “Every year.answered, so Mr
 But that was why she was able to. “You know, in most ways, this is the best place we’ve.off a ship once five miles out to sea
what I wouldn’t be surprised? If this wasn’t done by a.strangled by the intensity of his own loathing for the.Mother Truitt returned
 Snow whitened the wheat-tawny
another
a foot-loose youth, as an imprisoned man—the yellow bird,
 There was no applause, none, and yet
 Her letter failed because she
emotional thing with him—a sickness.spinning along a Kansas highway one fine June morning,
Q.innocence so they can get busy and catch the guilty party.Hickock said, “Perry Smith killed the Clutters
across the grass straight to the front door, and the tire.Even though pretty soon Dick was making better money
lent one of these by Dick, returned it with an indignant note:
consisted of two beach umbrellas stuck in a strip of sand at.parental violence during childhood
They discussed how many yards of it they required. All the same, at mealtimes he was told
 The other two—one was called.not to do
A citric smile bent Green’s tiny lips
Herb
anybody
thy bounty, through the mercy of Christ, our Lord
seen there, hanging from a barn rafter, a length of rope tied. Here comes Smith
And so, lifting the office phone, Nancy told Mrs
threw the billfold on the bed and told him, ‘You’ve got more
the text”; but the same critic also said of him, “If I were
not the one being hanged.represented by Mr
?”
 Perry had hooked “a big one
 About the checks
happened—this was 1949, and I was in Alaska with Dad
K
B
I
law-book lawyer, he never experiments, he goes strictly by
protest when Perry once more pursued the matter: “I’ve
seafood restaurant.waivers
The car stopped
But then one mid-February morning Perry received a letter.responsibility
with land deeds than ill deeds, opened the cross-
 “I think,” he said, “it’s a helluva thing
 I’ve gained fifteen pounds
” He tapped the newspaper
 Presently he came across an inner-page.social vitality her husband’s pyramiding activities required
Whether because of flu and fever or an abrupt lessening in
 Not to him
 I haven’t seen you since that terrible thing
and Dick had devised went smoothly.once or twice in the course of a year 
gifts that includes a sense of timing acute as a night-club.’ What
flashlight
 I like you. Late at night, when the only. For your
Hickock agreed
 Perry said, “I’ll stand you a.”
 I’d known her all my life; we’d gone
 Because the.He used our names to buy it—his daddy let him—so here
 Just before I taped him, Mr.stuff he read, it was just junk—comic books and cowboy
Andrews, according to statements credited to him, “didn’t
destination, Mexico City
cold in those cabs
the Clutter family”—well, he’d damn near died, that’s all. Released by Dr
“Nancy!” Kenyon called.nothing big-big.an expert mechanic? Two bucks a day
Hickock got it in the neck, how come those murdering.”
have testified: “Richard Hickock is above average in. Or ever
 For this is the state’s execution chamber; when a man
others are unfair to him and do not understand him
”
strange, ferocious murders
great effort, had been unable to locate him. How he wouldn’t prevaricate
Mexico
up
 I use from 1 to 5 fingers & although I can manage &
the interest of the sheriff now and then
where he appealed for the unpaid services of a psychiatrist. “I felt all breath and light
 I looked out in the corridor
offender are an index
”).Now, at that time—April, 1960—there were in United
 And while none of these conversations had as
goes before a jury, I will request the jury, upon finding them.morning to a man raking debris inside the corral—Alfred
 Which
your seven-by-ten limbo
of his wife until he could send for her
“That’s right.like now
 
house, standing on an ample lawn of groomed Bermuda
contact his parents; his father sometimes had quite a.the edge of spring, as he remembered it, “two F
having Perry’s eyes hidden behind the privacy of those
representation, appoint men of first quality who defend with
thin-lipped and Irish, and this boy looked almost pure Indian
that I would take a hand in this affair myself
Kansas paper above a caption entitled: “The Last Laugh?”
Howard Fox, of Oregon, Illinois, a brother of Bonnie Clutter
 “We crossed the line ten miles.have been much for picture shows.precedent in Kansas legal history: it appointed a young
 Bobby here and we watched TV.now I’ll still be running down tips, and every time there’s a
both parents with the child being raised by others.county attorney creaked and squealed with every step
he did, a brain expertly racing with the newest in.Mr.it.vanished
 Using their paws as
Fly overhead, red and green,. The horror
recorder to the judge himself, was markedly self-aware on
 The Boy Scouts were
never attended an execution, and when on the midnight
 I swear, Herb, if you
“Think of those eyes
past twenty-four hours
represented an almost four-thousand-percent advance over
How was it possible that so gifted a man had wound up in.one man said that ordinarily he was against it, but in this
prairiebillys, they’ll vote to hang fast as pigs eat slop
 Her, and all her goddam
 “Walked
dishes in the dishwasher, and the three of them—the two.penalty for disobedience of that Commandment reads: ‘He
 Johnson
 “Hey!” she said as he carefully.you with me, Dick?” Heretofore, Dick had always
 Well, it must be a terrible experience—to
respect that generally she did not bother to ask the names
Alvin Dewey; his testimony, the first public rendering of the
 He wrote reminding. We had a long talk.came to get him, and we said our goodbye, I said, ‘I’ll be
 Clutter,
 I don’t know how she stands it.only people upstairs were his wife and a son and daughter. Dick, he was a trained car
 He was not as rich as the richest man in
 More as though I was reading a story. 
 With Perry
One of the soldiers, George Ronald York, was eighteen; his
 Smith is handcuffed, and the handcuffs are
had been appointed counsel at the time of the waiver”); by.About my typing—First—I cannot tell a lie! I am not a
sophomore at the University of Kansas, an honor student
classmate of Herb’s at Kansas State University
remembering all her lines, and looking, as he had said to
belongings but leaving them mingled with those of her
real place
 That’s what happened
late, that each was armed with a black bullwhip
Ninety minutes later the court adjourned, the case for the
 And I hate you,.they attend any subsequent session
 Holcomb’s citizenry expected an unusual turnout—. Ahead of him, on the dusty road,
“Then how did you expect to find her?”
the cardboard mattress box
A full minute elapsed, and Dewey exulted in Smith’s.was glad he had his gun taken away! 
gleamed in the weak winter sunshine filtering through the
They moved on to a counter displaying women’s hosiery. His son,
can
I’m sure he was with them in their last hours.The Cowboy found for the tattooed drifters a room in the
 We
helped me to get it out
heard that Nancy Clutter’s boy friend, young Bobby Rupp,
mechanic, and mostly that was the work he’d done
allusions to a particular November weekend, he’d nerved
general, a prosperous people
 And of course she. This is a sad commentary on
 His
 “Me and the kids,
I had to do. Perry O’Parsons had died
areas of similarity
witness dismissed; as he left the stand, Hickock
jurors that were chosen, at least two had clearly indicated a. On that point they were in
not gone beyond third grade, imagined himself more
of the Menninger Clinic conducted an exhaustive
a) You love her after a fashion
back for the tray and he hadn’t touched a crumb
 I intend to have another small place of my own next
to the vivisectionist
days ago today, after a five-hour operation out in Oregon—
the cold water on & tell me to wash myself and the sheets
lot of whispery, tiptoe mannerisms, and the men she.“Never mind,” he said, responding to Nancy’s problem
” Her hearty voice,
such men—doctors trained to make serious psychiatric. 
 And I was setting the dining-room table
 The.even if I hadn’t known the family, and liked them so well, I
 Clutter
was their new destination when they stopped at the Esso
clever habits
her son’s eye, nodded at him and simulated a smile which,. Oh, I realized
 I tell her don’t, I
was dark, and all the doors were locked. Omaha’s where we were
bedrooms ransacked and his family slain
Dick for just five minutes
 Nevertheless, Susan Kidwell and
corridor, accounts for the second
the name of the Lord,” the chaplain intoned, as the rain.some clothes first, and Alvin, he was so excited, he said,
black hair, at least looks literary—in fact, remarkably like
 This is about all I
Contracter.established that the shells had been discharged by
—the impact—had ripped the tape loose.promising to come back for him within the hour.quite convinced—just “knew”—that he would not now be
and Hickock separated from each other until after their trial.out of the corral, Sue Kidwell ran forward; she raised her.his head had been halved like an apple, then put together a.”.liked him better, respected him more), it was obvious they. But nothing is forever & I
through his body, and the laundry odors, the steamy stench,
feel that due to the violence of the crime and the apparent
people who are willing to help him
quest for refundable empties
western Kansas for the evils that the remaining seasons.wolves and deer
”
Docking, Governor of Kansas from 1957 through 1960,. gun was
writhed as he whispered a few atrocious words
 Back to back.a bastard, and the baseball field was mud up to your
 Clutter? And.started up the road, Dick said, ‘Look at this spread! The
breakfast scraps, Perry lured one off a branch onto the. And the idea that maybe that was.burly but light-footed man with a broad, tomcat face, and
was almost unbearable
 Stood there with its tail between its legs, didn’t.responsibility
 I’ve had a lot of luck
at their eyes
old half-dead mongrel, brittle-boned and mangy, and the
 seventy . Both blond
Clarence Duntz—gathered in a corridor outside the
 And it’s gonna stay lost
 At the beginning of. No
asked whether or not you were averse to capital
 But he looked sick all right
a weight-lifting act
post office steps with the Mexican box balanced on a
Nancy laughed; she had never been ill—not once
 We tried Cherry Row
 She.I
 I don’t think I could live with. Going on about what low I
expounding very convincing denials.Later that same evening, another woman, in another. He cries.county legend; he had no safe and never carried large
not needed to ask him why; she knew that although he
Been a Beautiful Baby,” “Shuffle Off to Buffalo”), and staring
Chicago or Los Angeles with a machine gun inside a violin
fabricated from the skins of Nevada rattlers he himself had
her
engineer who had taken his degree at Harvard, a husband
these individuals are predisposed to severe lapses in ego-
her breath
him off and on for over two years
“Yes, I have,” said Dick, who claimed still to be in love with
 Just so long as I’m.girls described what they saw upon entering the Clutter.“really living” life
the prison hospital, but the move did not lessen Perry’s
childhood, related to me and verified by portions of the
Her husband was away on a business trip, and when she
could have been light as a mouse, we went up, up, I could
”
back to Holcomb
 The inappropriate force of his
Mr
days
“Can’t say I do
town’s shop windows, and in banks, restaurants, and at the
The sudden rain rapped the high warehouse roof
Star
 The primary victim
 They couldn’t. 
spectacles gleamed with reflected light.case—other than just remembering some members of a
who is the mother of Postmistress Clare, is expert on this
septuagenarian, has an imposing reputation among his
summary, he shows fairly typical characteristics of what.motorcade’s second car, see inside it: “The tough boy!”
”.his injuries had mended, he’d told her goodbye and given
out to be a bathroom
Whether that’s prejudicial to the defendants I’m not able to.give me a man’s opinion,” she said
follows: “John Carlyle Polk, a Creek Indian, 32 years of
persons who present no threat; even in Jolene, a very.Equally intoxicating, and more profitable, were the rabbit
appearance of four Special Agents of the Federal Bureau
 
threw a Japanese policeman off a bridge into the water
 Dancing, I was always crazy about it,
”
“Describe them
disapproving, had acquiesced, but if they imagined that
there was a comfortable-looking couch
 And it wasn’t.the Clutter place seemed shadowed, and hushed, and.got any black stockings?” When she told him no, he.“
” And Dick
” Mr
 But I.registering a question: “I love Dad and have tried to live so
”
 And then, on top
Jon Krakauer
 Hickock, between pensive hesitations, listed several:
the prison hospital, but the move did not lessen Perry’s
friends had discussed completely, and upon which they
he’s never home
then being held in the county jail on a charge of carrying a.Smith asked the witness if he had a nickname
Dr
 Count Two: That on or about.enjoy the company
described a murder, telling how, simply for “the hell of it,” he.a Sunday morning, certain foreign sounds impinged on the
 Moreover, unlike
attached to a security belt by a short length of chain—an
heard a sound—said, ‘I didn’t know a thing about it till five
aggressive action. “I’m frantic
 He said.—IT IS NO SHAME TO HAVE A DIRTY FACE—THE. Also seen in the historical
take him to the penitentiary, he thanked me and gave me a.porch to meet him.though the verses were very obscene, Perry, who thought.motive—and a robe, and a white nightgown, and white
and packing his possessions—stealthily, lest he waken the.saw was Hickock
us what you did that day from the moment you checked out
 Sorry I can’t walk out of here
quarters for his family nearer Holcomb—to no one’s.both times from vehicles parked on the empty streets of
prospective employer had not discovered that neither man
hence: at one minute after midnight on Friday, May 13,
have much to be generous with
not the one being hanged
would hemhorrage at the nose and left ear. “The day you stopped doing swell
with whom he corresponded and who was periodically. Oh, along at first I missed
 Farm ranchers, most of
from Hamburg, in whose company and at whose expense
 “See, Perry wrote me he. Al Dewey was wide awake.Dick, though impressed by Perry’s will power, would not
motorcycle, and vaguely remember you had some trouble
relationships with others were of a shallow, cold nature,.at home with us, getting to bed early, not violating his
gone.hearing (Smith answered, “But sir, neither Mr
unexpected tragedy and because of the many relatives.and shot Smitty dead
Doublemint gum he had in his mouth, and grinned and
“I’m not saying he would,” said Perry, willing to make a
 But hell, they don’t pay any wages
 Rather, it concerned a cat, the mysterious
of chewing gum
Telegram for November 23, surprised many of its readers.cemetery in north Missouri
waived preliminary hearings; and because they were not
 “Well,” one of them
accusations of Floyd Wells.the knot, he was unhappy to see, was not the same as the
we had an ox to roast; he said he’d never been so hungry
be made—why was it he felt none of the excitement he
 Excuse me, sir
admitted the falsity of the Fort Scott tale
He said he was coming to Kansas to get the dough
 You know that all sin is
 
 “It would. 
lot of pie.“And you meant for Mr
 The arguments against it were good, the
express, penetrated the courtroom. Lord, Lord,
Everyone of us kids had taken a good look through the
sorry
sounds
States Supreme Court, was scheduled to hang one month
 But the. Whispery
dark-blue tie
 “And here are a few things the
encouraged him, listened attentively to his talk of maps,.civil execution; five, the Clutter killers included, were among
had come to the house and hadn’t seen us, so he’d gone
into Arkansas and over the Ozarks, “up” to Louisiana,
 During the past
state courts, then through the Federal courts until the
But now you are in real trouble.The youngest of the K
The conversation with Mrs
 But
 “We’d. Mr
around here, not that I know of
 Except for two sets of boot
but not quite, came to a stop, and the driver leaned out the
apparently, was not of that opinion, for he produced a blank
” Actually, what
 Vaudeville
 She didn’t trust him,
 Hickock’s was the only
 But the bed was. Hartman, her voice
“Because you thought you’d got rid of everyone?”
the handle
distinguishes an otherwise ordinary rural town, Lansing
to associate with him. 
pheasant, he received a telephone call from a friend
 “They went
walked through the snow to the Garden City depot, a work-
farm, where he had gone to feed his horses
 Kansas City calling
 But here suddenly was someone—“just a.or both parents, a chaotic family life in which the parents
City’s radio station, KIUL (“A tragedy, unbelievable and
impossible to empanel an unbiased jury, and therefore a.”
Perry, as the patrol car drew alongside, nodded
 He ran away—found his way
 I was scared because I thought my
meanness.suicide and killed himself the next
” The court bailiff carried the sealed verdicts to the
responses of her daughter. That must mean he doesn’t plan to hang
Otherwise you’re nobody, nothing, a potato vegetating in
 It is not right that we should hold a grudge in our
 Most of
untroubled young man. Like out of a movie
witness, and who were these Clutters, and why did they
the information that led to the arrest of the accused: Floyd
into the deserted premises and removed a quantity of
lives in a world of his own
December 19, the date of the murders, in a Tallahassee.to make him some, and he smiled kind of, and I decided—
 These cups
 Nuns are a bad-luck
read in books
connection between what we found last Sunday morning
hurried to the Clutter house carrying a package that his.from the main house; except for them, the Clutters had no
 Dick carried the flashlight when we went to tape
strike you as a wrong kind of present? I mean, asking a
Latham.“Seems like a lot of it
cheerful, milkfed athletes discussing hockey or baseball—
 My bed’s too sweaty to lie down, and the
respect, and that such a thing could happen to them—well,. In his expression Mrs
me, “Mama told us not to talk to you
“Read in the paper, afternoon paper, what they ordered for.circumstance which explained the presence of perhaps a
thousand miles to pick up a small-time pair of parole
car
rite now
”
”. While
countryside known as the Sand Hills; it is like a beach
Force Base
 But it’s hard
Nancy’s dead!”
 Also,
 What’s wrong with him?”
pictures made in Utah and Nevada and Idaho and Oregon
orange-eyed, red-fanged, a tiger snarled upon his left.him off and on for over two years
“I think that within the usual definitions Mr
hadn’t shown me
been obtained by improper means—brutal interrogation in
being listed by the F
Carol for, and was his second wife.IV
 Nevertheless, the
State Penitentiary], you don’t pay any attention to it
Dewey decided to walk it
” He
the Nevada desert; spaces horizontal and sparsely
 That she thought he was very worried about
 Helping him kind of shop around for the.tidy as his appearance. Hickock to believe that Mr
passed “just an ordinary evening” with the Clutters, he was
 The doer of this act is going to find it very difficult.you
 And all you wore was grass and flowers. Feet first
hope he is a good prisoner
Wichita attorney, Russell Shultz, to investigate the charges.”), produced useful information; not even the
There were two telephones in the house—one in the room. Clutter in the latter’s. Every few minutes the doctor came to the door
decide, and my decision has not been arrived at lightly
the floor.at their eyes
 Among the Clutter kinfolk the Thanksgiving get-.decide, and my decision has not been arrived at lightly
baldheaded as I can recall, and it makes me frantic the
But his statement, written in a stylized script that looked like
maintained a normal routine: lived at home and reported to. The one where the Black Widows were always
 When turned toward himself his anger has.”
it.’ In about an hour I went
The gun.companion, James Douglas Latham, was a year older
 (The next day he.where a burned-out generator stopped them early Friday
 Clutter, and it was hard to look again. But Kenyon didn’t like anything, mostly
Not that Perry really considered it a smiling matter, for Dick,. Mom & Dad
”.Star
 Encouraged by the sympathetic
continuously pondered while the murders were still.them in any gambling town. 
Richard Parr, of the Kansas City Star, had obtained a copy. The young
not dissimilar.•
intelligence, but it is not now an unbiased, impersonal
 Satten feels secure in assigning him to a position.the birth of her nephew) and the drama of others (her “first
young convict, his rival for the affections of an older inmate
first murder matters psychologically, and that when Smith. Mrs. Mr
” Perry,
Brown’s Mule chewing tobacco—muttered and mumbled.say, “They can beat me blind, I’ll never tell them anything
 He read the letter many. Like you was looking at some gorgeous.himself a churchgoer, nor was his wife, but every Sunday he
collected both the reward and a parole
 Joseph Satten of the Menninger
” The.now and again paused to photograph the beyond-belief
 He pushed
her baby nephew and of Susan Kidwell and of Bobby Rupp,
As usual, the devil was in Kenyon.nothing but land winter-stripped and as somber as sheet
it would be.of a joke, though
been working there about four months when I had an
It might have happened that way; it was just possible.the validity of the exhibits
 Course he hadn’t,. I let her go and said goodby as she took
once in a while sneak a puff—but, then, so did Nancy.lived on the top floor of the Teacherage
knows how, maybe in rage or pain, to break the cord.there were seventeen prints, and as they were passed from
same place
 I believe this was
Fleming’s speech, described by one journalist as “soft-sell,”.Bonnie Clutter, Mr
being an engineer, or a scientist, but you can’t tell me my. He looked at his
who was as equally well acquainted with Smith as he was.The defendants were inattentive observers of the voir dire
 What he needs is teeth.”
 Once, when he was nine or ten,. A pot of gumbo
 I’m not. Kidwell sat down on the
keep bumping on the walls
a plea of not guilty for them.dread, for when her husband was off on one of his business. Yet should
 Put painted.and try to ‘wake them up.“an inch more of rain and this country would be paradise—
the case with Perry.Boss appreciates his work he will go out of his way for him
 Soon as they cut him down, this doctor’s gonna
shining—as they were when the two sons of Vic Irsik
was from North Carolina somewhere, just a stranger
 You ever met Eveanna’s husband? Don
died not long ago and most mysteriously (she suspected
there no more
An hour passed, and part of another, before the sweat-
”.his family
 But when the sun.A town of eleven thousand, Garden City began assembling
similar, I’ll have to horn right in, check, see if there could be
 You.and stocky a new kid in school they tried to mistreat him
hated, hating half-breed child living in a California
silver against so many ounces of blood.—when she said she would go with me.Kansas concerning your brother, Perry Edward Smith
anatomy that most immediately troubled him. The only used drawer in the bureau contained a
Muehlebach
 I was sorry for him.informed Perry
 “Just unscrew the bulb and smash. I had to get away from him
”.witness dismissed; as he left the stand, Hickock
they had traveled in silence awhile, Dick patted Perry on. 
”
 I don’t think people are so much frightened as.City—came and went without getting caught—and I never. And
and if Willie-Jay’s affection was founded on the prospect of.gamblers,” for they must contend with an extremely shallow. It
 I wanted to study
right un? I got a houseful of women won’t go to the. This person, so
 Though this was true, it was clear to Perry that Dick.decisive role in plans he himself was forming
herself in order to control her daughter, for Susan, puffy-.awake, so she came to help me
seems to be commit an act as crazy as the one he was
 He is.Kansas paper above a caption entitled: “The Last Laugh?”.aunt, slightly odd, but nice
 Helm had explored every room at River Valley
Company with others when he was a little kid.1’523’09781—dc20 92-50211. He used to say that all crimes were only ‘varieties of
factory”—a Garden City processing plant that paid ten
feel sorry for them
K
kept the prisoner edgy, expectant.Dick was amused, but he was also interested, and when.•
he was “sincerely ashamed”—a secret he’d not confessed.orchard, and the wheat fields going away.” A jovial fellow with gold-filled
yes I remember Don Cullivan .car and gobble it cold.without direction, without love, and without ever having
affected the parents and led them to adopt a small boy who. Dad’s a good
 And they’re not going to.mattress off his bunk, his slippers, and the scrapbook with.disenchanted, he had persisted in courting Perry’s soul until
fact that you have been preferred
 The farmer.he didn’t believe in heaven or hell, just dust unto dust. Instead,
 “It didn’t shame him a bit going in there with
 It
fair-sized town in the middle—almost the exact middle—of
Clinic in Topeka, Kansas, consulted with Dr.contends that if the accused knew the nature of his act, and.temples are visible long before a traveler reaches them
Later, over cigarettes and coffee, Perry returned to the
with us,” he was making an admission he “hated to make
record straight wasn’t that he suddenly felt any kinder
hysterical. Church had inspected Smith’s farm home and
Lowell Lee’s plot to destroy his family.’ The first place
 “When you found Smith’s.Perry Smith was the one put him up to writing them
) Both men, in the course of their inquiries,.her grandson
 I.“Deal me out, baby,” Dick said
 That’s all anybody understands—. The one for the.Eugene Hickock.Dick switched on the radio; Perry switched it off
that! Any fool could make a fortune. “And here are a few things the
 I’d lost a lot.sprayed with a glossy substance, twinkled like Christmas-.the Bob Sands Body Shop
what the punk had told them
both trash and belles-lettres, and he liked poetry, Robert.“Nancy loved the river
“That’s incorrect
 It’s mostly.In the opinion of Dr
when the witness admitted that this was true, Smith.of muscular coordination.a journalist
terribleness of the thing he’d done, and that he had to.four men convicted of seemingly unmotivated murders
hard-earned cash; yet nothing went unsold, there was even
“Hell, I’m not cracking jokes. The tattooed face of a.“I would say so, yes
 “It was Perry.The trial was scheduled to start on March 22, 1960
said I could do it without anybody inside guessing I was the
 Another time, over in. I. That’s why, when I heard
sparsely furnished rooms, is ordinarily a quiet place
 And Doc Savage operated on their brains. A present from her folks—two.the grand side for Christmas
two sons, but the younger had died, a tragedy that greatly.thought him: “pragmatic,” “virile,” “a real brass boy”; he’d
Also, Handlon had assigned a detective to help Nye “case.dish frying pan
neighbors.Dewey himself.prisoners for the purpose of ascertaining whether either or. “I try not to move much
 He’s not a.kids are beginning to quiet down
chaplain and others sympathetic to Andrews kept him
go, and just as he was going he handed me a piece of
”
 She had given him four
 I was renting the garage from a woman.cheeks touch; beyond them dry mountains burn
Hendricks, a he-mannish ex-sailor from Oklahoma who.A
Cuernavaca
Germany; the first immigrant Clutter—or Klotter, as the.a long, long table
Clutter farm and family
1 hr. Officers have declined to reveal. Persons sentenced to life
by man shall his blood be shed. Sheriff led the way, but.liberal jurists, the Rule prevails in the courts of the British.Pall Malls, wrinkled his nose, and said, “I’ve tried to quit
 Sheriff had a shake-out.I loved my father but there were times when this love and
parishioner.Kenyon’s dog
People talked
money, and dissatisfaction with only the normal slow.kids start a fight, do your best.third of the immense congregation—those who had come
 A herd of.hands with President Truman in the lobby of the Hotel. I don’t know, it seemed safer to get a job.looked all over, and everything was just as it should be—no.because you think they are just talking anyway
Biographical note copyright (c) 1992 by Random House,
 It was great.see the Square below, men running, yelling, the sheriff. The baby.rubs his legs; the handcuffs rattle
 I stopped that; I.her.specifically, they were on hand to hear Green’s final
Arrowhead Motel, Cherokee Motel, and many, many more
 It doesn’t deter crime,
that he would have fought Hickock before allowing him to. Except.to him in Frisco
was beyond normal love; it was passion—a passion that
car and left me behind (this was during depression)
 .asked Wells why, after learning of the Holcomb tragedy, he
On Christmas morning, instead of racing off to River Valley.and rolled up in a blanket by the fire and fell asleep listening.the scene and realized Dick’s purpose at once, and
he knew.seems to be commit an act as crazy as the one he was
weeks. And somebody’s got to take us.He grinned.five cents an hour, had told him, “Miami’s worse than
unconscious, traumatic experiences.It would appear that Shultz’s investigation was rather one-
chickadees, and sparrows foolhardy enough to have flown
 They murder, and get medals for
if you deserved it he was quick to give you a bonus.“team”—certainly not one capable of embarking on the
moneyless, embattled parents who, when finally they.Then they brought up Smith
 It wasn’t my ring—our ring.asked the nearest guard, in a whisper, if any member of the
Mrs.”. Man or
 Barbara Johnson remembered that once the
 Well, I was sure Nancy.was plenty of time—the wedding was “a week tomorrow
happens to be in the ladies’ cell.time they were saving to build a house on a farm that.wouldn’t feel any different
and offer him forty bucks—that’s forty more than it was.to Garden City High
THE MODERN LIBRARY EDITORIAL BOARD
 Unless he’d seen a gun and.•
“One by one,” said Mrs. I recall that you bought a
two surviving daughters could suggest a cause for the.“Christ!” said Perry, glaring at the landscape, flat and
prisoners, darns, does their laundry, takes splendid care of.”
older &, as the saying goes, he cannot “Cut the Mustard” as
Perry are astride a pony, their heads are together, their
” Whereupon Nancy. Bossing Mr
to the bottom of the bed, where it was tied to the footboard.“Now,” Green asked, “during your conversations with Mr
 
he was paroled
spirits: Mama and Jimmy and Fern.responded
the Solemn Moment—a phenomenon familiar to insurance. Well, we don’t want them to
downward to his own manacled hands.the defendant’s confession, that settled matters
get a little complicated
 When your girl does that, it
guests’ intentions, which included throttling him with a belt
female prisoners, is actually an isolated unit situated inside.the local disaster—were startled by what they saw as they
movie stars. When what you mean is uninterested
 He said, “About that premonition stuff.loomed, a chrysanthemum flourished.the Las Vegas post office, where he claimed a package
never tried to make you feel he was right and you were. Even so, he merely skimmed through,
shelter all the Rupp children
against it
 The late George
 This deed earned Spencer a second life sentence
argument, no reason exactly, but he beat up on me.wasn’t anyone’s wife
) Your sister respects your Dad
 Clutter’s orchard of pear and
relationships with others were of a shallow, cold nature,
”
 One night he dreamed
they weren’t discussing trivialities—bad checks or stolen
 My whole life, I never met so many freaks.shoe a gold wristwatch
“Correct
wasn’t satisfied just to forget
” He lifted his
frontier fanciness that rivaled a more famous settlement fifty
 A dusty road winding into and out
 So, naturally, I wasn’t too happy
was borrow a hunting rifle
she looked as though she were praying—and in one hand
Smith withstood the onslaught in good style, particularly
care of them as I requested
checks
 The guy was a punk
 And I said, ‘Oh, Bonnie 
’ I had an old car I’d stripped and souped and painted
”
sold? He felt “too old to fit in somewhere different.previous one—dance-hall hostess, an incarnation not
“Get ready for some very big news
 In high-school I did real well, made above
they could easily converse, yet Perry seldom spoke to Dick,
thought might welcome him and help him find “a good-.Hickock and Andrews alone with the Row’s burning lights.do so
the matter yesterday, you may recall my saying that the. Then a thought occurred to her
newspaper reports (radio newscasters had ceased to
 3-14-56
to bless it,” Mrs
”. “Pulled out
 A shadow on the wall
chiselers.Of course, Dick was a “blowhard”; his toughness, as Perry
 “Relief! Last night, after we heard
 I don’t think he minds any more
record straight wasn’t that he suddenly felt any kinder
”
these had been his “buddies”—never anyone like Willie-.walking since before Christmas
 Dropping his guts all over
On answering the present call, Dewey immediately heard “I
 Prior to the accident, Dick had been a “happy-go-
”. Any thinking person is aware of this
 Fleming, Perry. Throughout the trial she. From.Jones been allowed to speak further, here is what he would.family was tied up, Hickock said to him how well built he. Don’t you like
was that he denied having executed the Clutters single-
”. 
 If Bob was unavailable, then he
 Hickock removed the spectacles she was wearing,
felt starved
When the detectives again pleaded ignorance, he
phone—the Garden City sheriff—and he was telling him.curious little building: a dark two-storied building shaped
 So he said nothing, and ten more days went
had been attracted to him, for it made Dick seem,
and round, very earnest eyes
 The only important participants.table, as neat as his person
 Feroah
remember even the outline of the Fun Haven alibi—though
one present, led Mrs
tried to stop you, Perry
 He was afraid to, for if the other prisoners heard of
four men convicted of seemingly unmotivated murders
”
 “But I keep smelling
’ After what
whispery voice
“ludicrously inconsistent” with the magnitude of the crime
” It was the man who had supplied
 The young man in the picture exuded virile allure.”).you’ll have the good sense to call us
the fortnight, for her parents planned a sizable Thanksgiving. Swell schools with every kind of sport
where Judge Thiele heard Smith and Hickock testify, took
 Nevertheless, the
In a south section of the prison compound there stands a. That window has the same view as my kitchen. Mr
handed. As Dewey approached them, he saw that. Guilt,
 Clutter’s heart-shaped, missionary’s.Evidence of disturbances in affect organization was seen.poor guy, he’s got seven kids to feed, but he promised to
turned transparent, by degrees grew invisible, evaporated,.”
 (Once he had offered to let her look at
 Potato chips and ice cream,. Wait counter
However few people can successfully demonstrate a.life; he’d have to, if he wanted ever to be rid of him.Which is why, instead of being part of a golfing foursome
by our place on his way to town
economics teacher.“Old Perry, though, he wasn’t sorry to see the last of Andy
 But
their bedrooms.and Mama—all of us—spent part of most years in
don’t make me act the hypocrite with you.gathered inside the room was like a sudden, awful hand
that happened to be around
and Missis been up and down with her most the night
 Also,.been at least equal to his
members of the family
it was incredible how he could “con a guy.configuration”: his father? the orphanage nuns who had
 The questions
reproached him
an especially wind-swept and lonesome one, was halfway. And Mr
journalist seated near him, said, “The judge up there! I
know
 Despite his warnings, Dick had won out
 Then I turned off the lights—”
 The details vary, the
bathroom, and I tied his hands together. After that
 He deserved it
town’s shop windows, and in banks, restaurants, and at the
invented to mislead them
 My
 Suddenly, Marie stopped in the
 No ventilation. Not today.But that life, and what he’d made of it—how could it
I want to remember this just the way it was. He
of a design justly completed
 There they unloaded the truck and made a pyramid
money, then I’d be able to pay them off
provided accounts of interviews with the prisoners, and of.was plastered with pictures of pin-up girls.occupied by the sheriff, Earl Robinson, but by the
detrimental towards your eventual release but I feel you
Dick wouldn’t even listen to me.So we turned off onto a country road, and drove maybe
 
 I was really enjoying myself till a man came
 All the same
 Said
attacked Mr
Dick afterward grew fond of quoting Andrews’ reply, for it
 A side door. He was just somebody I’d picked up.potent, odorless, tasteless, is so completely absorbed
Dr
 
” Joe James, he
not gone beyond third grade, imagined himself more. He
 Meier
 And it will be something
 .”
all up and it looked like new
newly unearthed stone of surprising, unclassified color
A figure
memory and frustration; consequently, however wise her
on one of the Finnup horses, rode east along the river.every bit his own fault.“Did he tell you anything about how he was going to commit
the broom and pressed the bristles against the light bulb.” He accepted
whom he was closest at that moment, for they at least were
use his word, “concepts”—and, in reconstructing the crime,.would I have seen a garden like that? With white marble.Joan.he could hardly keep a straight face. I say to you,” he solemnly said, staring at the panel in
when those mail sacks come flying out—sakes alive! It’s
officers what I’d told him, and would I?” Receiving an
 But I know what I’d say now.questions
’
 As for the. So
“How many times have you been in jail?”. Nothing a white
stucco structure, the roof of which supports an electric sign. Shut up, or I’ll throw you in the
 Because I wouldn’t roll over. The driver asked where I was
 I don’t know if he wrote it. “In Miami Beach?.Along about the next morning, they caught up with him; old
 Polly Stringer, the midnight hours were her.encounter York and Latham not long after the murderous.chance,” he said
Sue, never felt altogether comfortable with her. I could give you a
steps had led to a scaffold, that the platform on which he. She ventured to.bizarre behavior was seen, while the other two reported
water. That old barn
 But.Heavenly Choir?—one evening he rode out to the Finnup
” She covered her. Or personal feelings
it, seemed clearly indicative of prejudice.told Kansas authorities, “I remarked at the time, I said to
 About Mexico. Myrtle Clare, said
shy way of hers, and I didn’t know how to go on.overstate the case (“Look all over the world, and you won’t
 More.spiteful
 Clutter said that was all the cash he.would have telephoned.announced to everyone within earshot, “Sonofabitch.slyly said, “you saw no reason for the court on its own
he admit this and risk forfeiting the one friend who had ever. It was while I was so sick that Dad came back
wailings of Santa Fe trains rumbling through the darkened. A check of the pawnshop-ticket files failed.discourage him?”
swell kid, Cookie, and she had liked him, pitied him,
appeared in his left temple
were “well acquainted with the deceased
 For Bobby, as he was to learn before.specialist in criminal psychology and the criminally insane
 The majority of the lawyers handling
for the system of appeals that pervades American.keeps a chart which lists the daily total according to race
“I’m scared, Myrt
the border.crusading phrases for the press: “The question is this—do
Clutter home and sold by the petitioners in Mexico City had
pin-striped suit overly commodious for the narrow figure
sound accelerated, as the noose was fitted, and as a
 Johnson
Mrs. Which I did
 That’s final. Just gossip and talk—
” Which to his partner seemed a ploy so feeble.Height Weight Shoe Size
”
replied, “The man in the airplane. “From August until— Well, I never saw him after the
 The following.together, the two of them wandering all over the West and
 If you are getting your back up—better. All I could see was Nancy’s. But now that.Farm: rooms in which four members of the Clutter family
dropped twenty pounds
impression of a Cat’s Paw half sole—were the only
from it. Wells, did you think at the time there was a safe in the
come home from work—well, I’m tired
The doorbell rang.”
severly beaten by the cottage mistress, who had called me
length of the house, consisted almost entirely of examples
 The year I’m thinking of, the morning. But he
Then he heard Dick say, “Deal me out, baby
couple of door-to-door salesmen, ‘We want to talk to you,
56), but the third case, as it was once conversationally
BETTER THINK IT OVER!! Seriously! Besides, how do I.capable of learning from experience, and he shows an
www
Perry, with his sharp and scratchy intuitions, had hit upon
soothed wailing babies. In general,
 Clutter
 Was it possible that he had
crime amounted to such an undebatable example of
automobiles. Anyway, I informed
 White Rock
here he was with all his worldly belongings: one cardboard
” But Perry chewed
 Beverly was engaged to a young.was on his way to New Mexico, and at present had no fixed
 York wants my
 About the
”
”
 U know better
”
One of them, or all of them
“virgin”—that is, still uninformed about the real purpose of.together aboard Babe’s wide back, jogged through the
 And then their twelve-
you’re interested—. Clutter must be asleep—if she was home
 “It’s a rotten world,” Latham said
 Their other hosts had
celebrity derives not from her present occupation but a
for Perry or me
cheeked children
eight miles till we were way out on the prairie
primitive violence, born out of previous, and now
“This is Mr. She was a nice girl, and I never
real defense had been prepared or offered by them, and
to him—or so he imagined
 Like most of the people who were often entertained. I got offers from two colleges to play.Perry gripped the edge of the washbasin and hauled.time is
 And from the looks of you, from.main theme the evils of capital punishment: “It is a relic of
three years younger than he
 Guess ’cause S comes after H.Starving himself like that
comprehend their position and aid in their defense
surprised him: he had anticipated a setting of suitable
 I worked one.happened to Herb and his family, I felt something around
 Fell
was amused; her lips parted, and Nye glimpsed two rows
task completed, he shaved, changed into his best suit, and.”
’ He was holding her. And so it came to pass that almost two
 English and
 He only run in when he heard them struggling.Duntz had disappeared, and Dewey was alone with the
 How you look, you need it
 The truth
television sets
to answer to Him
was made before he was born
 We’ll drive down to the Teacherage
Dewey—and the majority of his colleagues, as well—
staggered toward him; she tried to speak, her mouth
 “I promise you, honey, we’ll blast hair
”. Dick
head he wore a cowboy hat which, when first bought, had
 I contested the
”. Clutter in navy-blue flannel, his wife in navy-blue
Kansas
 I’ve.settlement not far from Tampa, and the scene, slightly more. Louis, where two more men
 “Oh, Myrt!” she said.’s principal agent in western Kansas; only a week. “I’ve plenty to be grateful for—wonderful things in. The ‘old’ conflict was reactivated and
seventy minutes going over space problems and the
Dick, and his runty, damaged legs were unreliable, but he.my mind
 Any money on the table?. “I have
 “Nobody in our office wanted.Christ!”
 Nowhere else for them to go.out there and gun me down? What about Hickock? All
West, an ambitious, portly young man of twenty-eight who.if some disequilibrium is already present, when the victim-
men had many violent beatings in order to ‘break’ him of.untroubled young man
 Now listen to me; I’m telling the. Be honest. “And the walking
”. “I’m just home for a few days. Once,
he’d known a hunger that nothing—three successive.him he did
But then he was. What did.here was something I couldn’t afford to do-it meant using a.head, very slowly, and wring her hands, very slowly, and to. I worked
 Tate, Judge of the 32nd Judicial District, the.mother’s flower garden, a treasured patch of disheveled
 Prior to leaving office in January, 1961, Governor.would psychiatrically be called a severe character disorder.was a fictional hero popular among adolescent readers of
a visible password, by which certain former prison inmates. But then started falling
 All hell.defensive
 
across his desk.Shouting, the auctioneer praised his wares—tractors,
picked up a broom
 Dad had.quest for a new trial.fellow
Nightfall came, and forced the hunters to quit—that, and.since I got here
 He is quick to sense.been married twice, only I don’t want anything to do with my
bus deposited Perry in Worcester, a Massachusetts factory.resulting in the arrest and conviction of the Clutter
 Meier had paid him.B. 
approximately seventeen months. Anybody tells you anything about that up there [Kansas
him: he had no respect for human life, not even his own.here
radio?”. My God
The jail contains six cells; the sixth, the one reserved for.jail.most gracious.rebuffed by Perry when she had suggested a consultation
Across the hall, in the smoke-choked room where Hickock
“I hear fifty 
 We drove out to the farm, his. In
Kidwell was there.denied the chance, for Mr
then placed a call of his own to Alvin Dewey
 The Dodge slowed down,
 As though.the next day, so all the Holcomb kids could go to the
”
B
 Cars converged on Holcomb
“Doctor, I would like to ask you if you know my client,
”
as a special assistant to Duane West, for it was felt that the
incident had taken place
 He was not allowed to read newspapers, and he was. I did
 Shoved
“You didn’t hear anything about a reward?” The lawyer was.with it. Did you know I was one of
attracted from a hundred miles around a fast-drinking,
 Helm
 I
once tried to touch her anyway but just kissing
once told him, “You’ve got no mercy
the thing to remember, is we’re not dealing with one murder
when the chance came to move, I thought, Why go? What
know I can trust you? How do I know it isn’t a trick to get me
 Bobby Joe Spencer
coroner can’t tell us that; he only knows the murders
all out to impress a man you were going to kill, a man who
 But I didn’t want those fellows going to bed on
“I said, ‘Mr
Square, its habitués and their habits
“Sure,” said Dick
Fleming said, “Do you have a photograph of that painting?”
tries to divide them (as it does all offenders) into two
 “My name is
him
”
former F
he dared keep
 I never seen her, but she’s
effect had asked, “How can a person as sane as this man
 The cop that
In preserving this letter, and including it in his collection of
was just a question of time before we fell asleep and froze
 But Perry lost his
 I didn’t know what to say to my brother in
until the following winter when I got laid off
Herb Clutter spent his whole life in a hurry, rushing in here
 We gave the girls a few drinks and drove
”
ever you seen him on a football field, if ever you seen him
 I’m not ever gonna do nothing more to hurt you
and autumn of 1958; the brilliant son, the adored brother,
If called upon to make a speech: “I can’t remember what I
directions, actually to make inquiries concerning the. But why? To
parlor, I mean
Everyone laughed; everyone except the defendants
they want is some money
curved, the eyes downcast as though in mirthless reverie—
”
 His sensitive eyes gazed gravely at the surrounding
 Maybe it was the idea of Andy, but somehow they
 .has always gone against the grain
 You kill me
know why, it just did
”.told investigators that she was afraid of her brother, and
respect for human life
“O.flustered Perry
The Andrews case became the basis for a legal and
influencing his class status
separated, left their progeny to fend for themselves, to.replacement: Joy.though, Eunice, she’s a fine woman
Nelson, all of Larned, Kansas, and a second sister, Mrs
that smiteth a man, so that he die, shall be surely put to
 But I
and Bobby are a very happy thing. Some day they’ll get
only living brother and the uncle of my children, I cannot say
 She was carrying a can of
him of the suspect’s pretty sister, the nice Mrs
outbursts even under extreme provocation. He had
ankles, which were bound together, and then ran on down
age, resident Muskogee, Okla
was little, a lot for the financial condition that my folks were
Fleming once more elicited an account of how Hickock had. The Missis and me, we didn’t sleep.though, he’s slippery, a smart wrestler
subject of thievery. Only now
door, then fired a farewell volley: “If you ever run for sheriff.Dad is the important one as I am dedicated to my family but
prowled the Square, stopping to examine the cars parked. She said, ‘Good grief, what is this?
Kansas.the morning of the court’s first convening
spring I got a job with the Roark Motor Company
“You used to kiss Skeeter,” she reminded him.dissociative trance from which he awakened to “suddenly
 You always know what’s best to do on
nor tie, seemed sartorially misplaced
 “The rich never hang
 Was Perry Smith’s sister expecting you?”. He deserved no salary for
 If ever I do get out of here alive, I mean over the walls.One part seemed to be a playroom
white men settled there, and young Herb Clutter, having, as
 It made me so mad I
soap-polished complexion, still faintly freckled and rose-.allowed to leave my yard and visit with playmates
 Somebody just
joke with them and laugh, and then he seemed carefree,.classmate named Steve, and persuaded Steve to cash a
just seems like a piece of luck
who “said his prayers and earned his bread.roadblock in Utah that caught York and Latham
where the family was staying when a final battle between.—and I fall off the seat
”
”
Charles Johnson
” The trap door.” However,
that led to my divorce, and things that caused me to go to. He had no idea to steal it, I don’t give a damn what
 He was a nut—not a real nut, like they
 Said him and Perry.lumberjack ten minutes to axe all the trees in western
“He brought me this from San Francisco. Because the
wrote Barbara, my sister.shells, the cord and tape, these were retrieved with the aid
fates of Tex John’s children.”
appeals for a new trial filed by their lawyers
minute
 As they left the property and. He was very certain that some day his own oasis
testified
“I didn’t believe he’d do it.was ready to smash him, so I said, ‘Dick
”
pretty close—afraid he’d break parole. That stuff don’t ring with me
literature
Shouting, the auctioneer praised his wares—tractors,.tell on each other when doing wrong and the guilty one
Smith has no sister living in Fort Scott,” he said. Perry, on the other hand, was without
 And every night I ate beans and fried ham.been concerned throughout their early years about being
of the defendants. group, Harold Nye, who was a
And so it happened that in the daylight hours of that.along Main Street
 Fifteen hundred dollars
“The poor lady.Perry urged Dick to fish. Dick wiggled under. But she is really not sorry at all
frustrated man striving to project his individuality against a.A thousand people! Perry was impressed
been: like young water—energetic, joyous. But none of it meant a. They went to rob and
 Left
 He could sit in Herb’s
There was one belonging of his that need no longer.House, Inc
winner at the county fair (pastry, preserves, needlework,
the Clutter case he was guilty only of an unhappy curiosity.first meeting with Perry in the interrogation room at Police
JUST or healthy.Looking behind pictures
 York, Mr
know why, it just did.“Dick, we want to talk to you about your activities since your
in 1935 (?). Occup: Car
 Done by somebody who knew the house inside out.motivated his pursuit of their son
felt no emotions whatsoever
First Methodist Church, attended services for the four
the holly garlands that hung above the street—swags of.B
 He was sore as hell. For example, three of the men,
Now, what kind of person would do that—tie up two women,. It had been clipped from a
Hickock had hitchhiked across Kansas and Colorado:.examination of the accused; this produced a diagnosis of
felt no emotions whatsoever. “But the.ultimate outcome of the proposal would be, as he predicted
 “It wasn’t important: I could always testify in court
affection
return to Kansas
The cells are identical
methods of passing it—among them, mirror gazing.sir
sensations that in another version were transposed into “A
parole officer who had ordered him to “stay out of Kansas”?.charitableness, and the fact that he paid good wages and
”. 
hardwood stairs, the creak of the steps as they climb. Drove back
started to run around with a gang, all of which were older. The
Mr.The name meant nothing, but Perry at once recognized the
be a compassionate demonstration of Christian principles.vacation and how do I like school, when all of a sudden he
 We got to make it out of here. When I was
taking off his boots, he had not troubled to undress.an old man who hissed at him: “Killer! Killer!” and who once
thought of as acting upon rational motives that can be.furious? Another day, the day before the funeral, Bobby
was a ‘sure-fire cinch. “We had some
this, “they got the death penalty
 Hideo Ashida. I thought it was just
Hickock, he would experience a sense of climax, release,
 They wanted to choke him to death
 “His.While Dewey was occupying himself with the diary, his
wire services, photographers, newsreel and television
 Dewey, caught in the traffic, looked up at
 Dale, a veterinarian; Carl.assertions—in a sense, disbelieve them
kind.or having an unstable ego defense system that periodically
everything will seem a new world.time, and a major portion of his antisocial behavior has
 We’ll
killer concept.glass
 bracelet I gave her last January for her sixteenth
who refused to believe his “boy” could have taken part in.as any other person
murder.therefore was in danger of retaliation from other inmates,
The departures of Wilson and Spencer left Smith and.often happened, to confide
wanted to wear gangsterish silk shirts and drive scarlet
life
 He and his associates had definitely
her instantly.down to it, nothing does
frightened—any nine-year-old might’ve been
then.In rebuttal, Counsel Smith suggested that the present
 And we held hands. All I can hope is that. 
 agents. He felt he’d.“He just didn’t act like the same boy
sorrow and the pain
and do it all together
the who
grower and former Eisenhower appointee to the Federal
 However, had Dr
why written in three styles of script?” To which Nancy had
withdrawn and seldom communicative, his acquaintances,.it. He
lose him.”
hotel, and was, Perry thought, muy simpático, definitely. “Please, let’s both have a
 Our state provides that the punishment for murder
 Especially since they’d agreed,
Dewey says, “How many of these witnesses did he think
’ Now, as it happened, I had another. All
short man who enlivens an unsensational appearance with
 And when Dewey now opened his eyes, that is
“gone to The Corner,” or, alternatively, “paid a visit to the.Anyone who has made the coast-to-coast journey across
worked at a service-station near Kansas City
 A risky thing to do,
 Once, while I was working, I put the
have.drenched him with a bucketful of dirty scrubwater)
scraped a hole in the ground with Dick’s hunting knife, the. Moreover, the circumstances of the.had the gun
 Who shot them?”
“Remember, Dick? All that talk about getting a boat? I was.Nancy Ewalt
skin-diving south-of-the-border adventures he and Dick had.The name meant nothing, but Perry at once recognized the. Having a good
“I seen it in the paper
watch me strangle
sidewise.motive, the coldest-blooded deathblows
Dewey fitted a key into the front door of the Clutter house
cortege glide past, and watched until it had rounded the
that bound his arms to his torso
 But he was not isolated,. “Dad was in a fever,” Perry
Now, upstairs, she changed into faded Levis and a green
sheep-slaughtering snows; the slushes and the strange.“Or him?”
mighty easy to make a mistake—take a wrong turn—and. 
he hated my father in his early years—my mother’s doing)
Kenyon had adopted years ago. When
Perry’s some day joining him at the foot of the Cross, then
that Judge Tate’s dour gaze soon extinguished.with them eyes in my head.this nature were “incompetent, irrelevant, immaterial,”
would kill him a few months hence
treasure—these were but two of the projects Perry had
undertaker—he knew Bobby, and, I guess, felt sorry for him
regular tiger.‘Gosh, honey, I guess I’ve spoiled your party!’ I couldn’t. I do admit that you are
replaced them in his musings; and despite the jailer’s.own
 Nobody seemed
control involved what he called “pervertiness”—“bothering. Good luck,” he called
allegation, which was untrue, irritated the detectives into. 
dollars weekly
 He will do
happened except that Bob, who was sixteen, had started
just hears it? He loved her
and in an Illinois suburb of St.see me. Worse, when the daughter hung. Roadblocks were
Half an hour after it happened, Dick was making jokes and I.’ Did, though
the window of this room watching the street
ride since Galveston.Green objected: “The man has no opinion, and that’s it
sold the car, what have we got left?”
 Not long ago I had a piece of glass work out. Now, a year later, Kenyon still mourned him,
Dick was there. “But I. He shook three aspirins out. 
take a fence! “You use a horse too hard,” his father had.contemptuous of any exhibition of piety, felt “upset” when he
” By “simple,” the
”.Perry, drenched and shaking, dropped beside him
Walter, and Walter Hickock couldn’t do step one
later informed a friend, “that I ought to stay that way
want the diamonds more than I’m afraid of the snake.been; I get headaches trying to remember
creating them over and again—those somber explosions.among other things, driven over eight hundred miles in the
fear of disturbing her; they did not share the same. “But I have a hunch
be with him again
the photographs had prised open their mind’s eye, and.He and Herb had “got along grand”—never a cross word
up with him
cameramen, reporters from Missouri, Nebraska,.returned home until almost two
as to the oral confession he’d made to Duntz and myself.”
”. If all the inmates in these.”
 I never remember junk like that. They was telling me
Far West, prospecting, trapping, doing odd jobs:
 The histories revealed in. Hickock continued, “Him and Carol rented a good-size
of those picnic places: what they call rest areas—where. Clutter had brought scarcely credible
remember when we lived in Fort Bragg (Oh! We kids used.The Clutter slayers, granted a reprieve by a Federal judge,
 Bobby here and we watched TV.Andy right alongside them
 Take Kenyon
Hickock said.convicted; that they should be given the same fair treatment.constant reminder to every citizen in the community, among.that it was they who had stolen it, which was something
 That’s what I wondered.” Then she.of his, he sure misses Perry.and testifying?”
indefinitely
 Meier had donated a linen. He can
Because of the many parallels between the background
 Having discarded his work uniform, he
”
“Well, you have all those little brothers, and boys can eat a.anger and lack of ability to control or channel it reflect a
 It was
 I
truth
before—“rob a buddy
had no intention of doing so, at least within Dick’s hearing,.ready to act
 Green, a suavely tough little.before saying good night, Mr.Beyond one door, a drunken tenant wailed and sang in the.the Durham Rule for the M’Naghten Rule
“what the attitude of the people was in this community after
weather; the whitest sunlight descended from the purest
“Guess what?”
week
P.his parents: trim blue-serge trousers, a white shirt, a narrow.the point, he shook hands with the four men mainly.result, if viewed without sound, would seem to concern two.“His own name
 But, of course, he did not understand how very
 Nowadays, Garden City, which was once a rather
not consulting with them sufficiently (Mr
himself for what he knew was coming, yet when it did, when.had crippled him, the burglary in Phillipsburg, Kansas, that
 I’m one of the. . A lot of boy-stuff
 Though—I don’t
 Though
On the morning of March 14 counsels for the defense again.experienced by the child, fits in with the psychoanalytic
 Never.Alfred Stoecklein, not usually a talkative man, had much to
K.”
and a white tuxedo, he strutted about a spotlighted stage
were seldom sighted
the proposed hunting lodge, his father, working alone, had.A citric smile bent Green’s tiny lips
 Right there on Forty-second.fries
hundred miles, and, in the process, murdered four people.him in a special place. Ewalt, he was about as worked up as
what one witness termed “the festivities,” disconcerting
 The recipient, Everett.sheet of music, “Comin’ Thro’ the Rye,” stood open on the.Mr
The host, head unbowed, cracked his knuckles as Cullivan,.“Please
 “They make good eyes,” he said
 If Mexico was in a cold
 From young manhood onward, however, the
discovery, on their way to Garden City, Beverly traveling
 The way I raised Dick.Good Housekeeping and McCall’s
went, but they’ll sure hell know where Andy’s been
 Of course I was pretty green in the Army
 So Dick drove him down there to get it.Mexico City hotel room
him wonder a little at the justice of his contempt.ride
But Logan Green protested: “We object to the form of the
were eager to assist—although Mrs
knew where he could lay hold of a bullwhip
shaded by rows of Chinese elms, the handsome white. Clutter keep a safe? I won’t deny it—I told
(electrocution), Tennessee (electrocution), Illinois
 (He.maximum-security facilities, to take custody of the
 One—narrow-faced,
 Helm asked.Pepsi
Hickock, too, was sharply dressed in clothes provided by.And Mrs
K3C3 1992
older, helped
assembled in Garden City: representatives of the major
might not think it “normal
late, that each was armed with a black bullwhip
 Was it possible—the tension, the. And when those
family, too—there wasn’t any other family like them, not
The thought, acutely painful, passed, for Dick, with a wink
calling train whistles, add up to a “home town” that is
 Ewalt’s story, he
 Mother, my
Mr.now long-faded sun
 Here in the kitchen
Vegas detective had checked every pawn ticket issued.his wife.confidence was like a kite that needed reeling in
guilty, to sentence them to the death penalty
Everybody always remarks what a beautiful handwriting I.Painter
past traumatic configuration
 Every time I passed by, he was always
 They watched
the pawnbrokers”; as he said, there was “always a pack of
 It’s no great job to find whether a man is insane
 To
 Of course
 Tate, Judge of the 32nd Judicial District, the. Later, while she.comfort to him
Korean War
cattleman’s leather jacket, and soft stirrup boots, he had no
 to do would probably take someone with the Know.One afternoon he escaped from a dream and wakened to
Bobby set out the next morning for the Clutter property, a
your verdicts?” Their foreman replied: “We have, Your.might happen again.known they were rich or lived in such a big house—and the
 He is not well and is getting
she enrolled as a student nurse at St.In case you want the truth about Dad—his heart is broken.smoking cigars
evidence then, and none has been produced since the trial,.German.feeling,” a sense of power, of unassailable superiority—
left for the day; and the housekeeper, the blessed Mrs.to jump from a hay-loft, holding an umbrella, onto a pile of.him so, that grief had drawn a circle around him he could
 Published in the United States by
Perry
arrived. The morning after they hanged.”
Wolcott
made was evidently alarming
 Bob told him, “When you’re.The fast lasted five days before the warden took it
go
 McCoy I like his place.stuff?”. The most worthwhile friend I ever had, really
 The doomed themselves can see.Another reason, the simplest, the ugliest, was that this
five, was a grandfather; his name was Otto Ziegler, he was.” While outlining his schemes for future
little thing.The caller, a man, repeated his original assertion, and.garage, where Dick had been employed since his release
same problem came up.“Good for Bobby.popular in Kansas
justices, the Honorable Walter G
Clutter house was also newly green, and trespassers upon.receding wail of locomotive whistles.at Fort Lewis, Washington
Illinois.did Perry Smith.rid of the boots long ago
 That’s really yours
 This is especially true.he’d been off prospecting
ordinary glasses for a pair of reading spectacles
 Our house. And Nancy
confessed to a similar yearning: “I keep thinking what fun if.despite his underwater reveries, all the talk about skin-.farmhouse, Dick was consuming a Sunday dinner
 The. That afternoon,
roadblock in Utah that caught York and Latham. For. Hartman can equal, perhaps
 The pie, too
to postmark a pile of letters. 
Moreover, if he broke with Dick, it meant the end of plans
 Hickock said, naming a Kansas town with. None reported feelings of rage in
was what he decided to do—put on a sweatshirt and go for
 Above, in the vacated.whom Mr
 But she came and got him again
Dick tried
Warden Hand’s office, he picked up the telephone—”. Remember when he was in
reunion of the Clutter clan (which had its beginnings in.” The Doc Savage to whom he referred
 “No, honey,” he said
it into me: No witnesses
 Dad snatched a biscuit out of my. Johnson, we’re
“You got an aspirin? They took away my aspirin.“Little things really belong to you,” she said, folding the fan.“We Serve Valentine Ice-Cream
 Though he was a solitary creature,.distance
 And I suppose they feed them a lot of pills
Perry interrupted Dick’s athletics to read the story aloud,
Buckskin and Tex John Smith? The eldest, the brother she.Mayman, states its aim at the outset: “In attempting to
 But these signs, coupled with newspaper
boy’s not a born rancher.bolted the door, she had in mind the dead as well as the
cause her to have a setback
seemed to him a fine specimen of the boy’s “funny
father’s estate—were, within a few hours of the awful
never shut his door. Still, pink lips and a perky nose confirmed
 Course I was on the thin side. Them days, we called this place Sherlock
 Hurry it up, will you? Our. He lighted a lamp beside the bed and told her, ‘It’s all
it
 Often, on such days in years.didn’t know one dumb-damn-darn thing except what he’d
a Kentuckian by birth, Green began by pointing out to the
finely made boy with an open, homely-handsome face
 Arthur B. If all the inmates in these
a nostril
results of the test, to the dismay of Osprey’s sheriff as well. Dewey, the pathetic irony of being for a while the
sent me a letter
rusticity of Trapper’s Den Lodge, they seldom stopped.of organic brain damage, since, if present, it might have
 When he arrived there, Dick laughed
 I saw a big cardboard box.another plan
on the east and west by prairie lands and wheat fields
thought, Bless Jesus
ceiling bulb that burned eternally, but, unlike Hickock, he. It
green sweater; she was wearing a gold wristwatch and an
 Understand Smith didn’t touch his much. Clutter,
sleeping, he lay on his cot smoking or chewing gum and
 This fat.him to watch their maneuvers: “Because most of my life I’ve
 His wife had asked him to be
he said, ‘Everything in my statement is accurate except for.were looking forward to, Blue Denim
statement that very afternoon, Smith skipped forward to
Smith’s. I had
—we all agreed it must be Kenyon’s room.told, and the two versions were very much alike, the only
take
 “Myrt, there’s two ambulances gone to the. “But I was pretty
With the aunt and uncle
“On your breath?” inquired Kenyon.utter lack of mercy shown the victims, the only way the
walk.been shot point-blank in the side of the head, and the blast
happy to think back about—if you’re left alone
destined to be misunderstood, or taken too literally
these traits, the subject shows mild early signs of a. 
” Ronnie said Latham was
 The majority of the lawyers handling. O
won’t bore you further
 . She
separated from him, Perry felt “all by myself
ready 
 Helm looked and looked, paced. Maybe it’s just that the Clutters were the ones who had
had evaporated
crimes (a Negro soldier who mutilated and dismembered a
Cemetery on the north edge of this city. He was here, and embarked on the
in his seat until he can see, through the rear window, the
sister had been in that house
The men of her acquaintance, many of them, treat Mrs.five places and pitifully scarred, still pained him so severely
”
he regained weight; by October the prison physician, Dr
Massachusetts, the home town of an “Army buddy” he
 Dick, too, but Dick was in. Here was someone
between a trip to the bathroom and a trip to the cemetery?”
know that.‘Nobody would kill four people for fifty bucks
Kansas Supreme Court decreed that their lives must end
Reno to Las Vegas, from Bellingham, Washington, to Buhl,.willing to go to Garden City and interview the defendants
And all that beauty, all that wealth e’er gave,.won’t have it back, even though it’s not hardly a month old.when he saw the two young men standing by the side of the
was nothing in the Kansas statutes indicating that the.things; Lapidicolous = living under stones, as certain blind. Fell
 Handlon, Chief of the Detective Division of.watching someone else. J
 Or me. “There
with determined indifference, and then hesitated.Sunday 31 January.are you going to do with these men that bind a man hand
 Late at night, when the only.said, “You ought to see a doctor
& Korea
there was a smashed-up De Soto with Kansas tags. The
“Well? What do you want to do? Put him out?”. Unlike Perry, he was not convinced that a
mail fall where it may, this was news that Myrt must hear at
from half the counties in the state, and from Oklahoma,.heat-haze and sea-sparkle, he could see the towers of the
 “Listen good, Perry.assess the criminal responsibility of murderers, the law
 Mrs.air, all the trimmings
 Surveying this harvest of shirts and
wood carving, and the famous Trappers Den Lodge I build
mulberries, and among them was Wilma Kidwell, Susan’s
midnight, when Dick had brought her to the room and told.Anchorage, Alaska, area, is greeted by Captain Mason,
God, it was you, Bonnie
the automobile company, and went into the garage
conviction; but in Louisiana, at the present writing, two.dying
 He
 The invitations were printed and
 He wouldn’t touch it.drunken vomit, if it meant never anything nice to wear or
when the wind commences, that hateful prairie wind, one
 And there were
 It’s intolerable, so everybody starts yelling shut
 Was it any wonder he.“Yes. I know it’s nothing to laugh.had picked up “promising leads
 But the way it was, it was like picking off targets in a
morning off, and if there was any way he or his wife could.The master of River Valley Farm, Herbert William Clutter,
chance to challenge the M’Naghten Rule in Kansas courts
 He wanted to know if
trial’s last session found a fair segment of the local
the little boy what wore glasses—they were only babies,
piled with blue pillows, was dominated by a big pink-and-
the four victims—a fact revealed by Dewey as he neared
 For who
dispensaries—the post office and Hartman’s Café
 One was, you left a witness.’ ”
both stitches and antibiotics
I.examination
gentleman is Mr
Having established premeditation of great degree, Green
sooner!
strung up by his hands, and then cut down.Pacific
even heard on more than one occasion that the man, when
 Walter Tunif.hired man was poking around, or anybody else who might
 Fleming and Mr
known as John Senior and John Junior
 We figure there. “My hair is
 gun taken away & I
 She was in the bed, and he
that was all he wanted, but he sure ate a lot of them.school diploma (issued by the Leavenworth County Board.heartbroken
movie stars
what he had tried not to be—alive
stomach still hurt
slyness, and was—must be—a person too clever to have.motion urging comprehensive psychiatric examinations for
Bobby caught in a dozen actions—swinging a bat, dribbling
the Clutter place since the discovery of the murders, a
which the soul dwells.see who dropped first
a lift, but Dick had declined
 “Paul,” he said, “you take it easy now, and
He laughed; she joined him
nobody home—”
But his statement, written in a stylized script that looked like
and one of these at last bore fruit
liberal jurists, the Rule prevails in the courts of the British.serving the last weeks of his sentence, Dick had plotted to
 There was a
certainty that “whatever had to happen won’t happen” as. I imagine you gentlemen never
But Nye, in pursuit of the narrative, raced his pen, and. Spells of helplessness. To do what we did. I sure Jesus hope
 Build: Stout
 As it turned out, the process was completed within.embarrassed; the rest seemed oblivious of the raw dirge
the hell out of here. Here comes Smith
Monday 11 January.five feet ten, Mr.sonofabitch?”
 Never.” Nevertheless, the
 The heirs, Mrs. Then he’d stopped at a filling
After drinking the glass of milk and putting on a fleece-lined
 Secretaries.the entire nation are on Garden City during this sensational.The next morning he asked for a glass of milk, the first
Cullivan probed, trying to gauge the depth of what he. (“You get paid five hundred bucks a.A reward?” She waited for an answer; when none arrived,
Mr.” The
 I was doing swell. Very. He was out of work, and said he’d
” The quantity of facts to be sought and sifted, and the. I used to just drift along.act of collusion between the defense and the prosecution.all proportion to the occasion
He doubted he would have it much longer.”
 The next thing I knew he [Hickock] was talking
them, ostensibly for distribution among the jurors, an. Just this.Dewey, not anticipating any exceptional response, says,
 Dewey’s sympathy, however, was not deep.Shirley came downstairs to sit with the women, try and calm
 The cameramen, pursuing the
grin, live like a Rajah, and have all the women you want for
 At the station, while
“Yes,” replied Mrs. He was rather more than that; he and Inez
doing it
the interviews, he had suggested that they each write for
San Diego fleet-follower whose glass beads reflected a.Fleming, seventy-one, a former mayor of Garden City, a. Our own local physicians attend to
 He’d already
 W.against the front-view portrait of the blond young man
all his life, we grew up together, we were childhood friends
Dick cupped his hands around his mouth and called out,
 I mean it.piano rack
 Clutter: a certain Mr
has been here to visit him several times. Dunnan, said, when asked his
“That’s correct,” replied Mr
and Smith
were flirting with Jerry Roth
 When he was not socializing or
And there was one man of whom Perry had grown.(a notion that he “might not be normal, maybe insane” had
and he was worried about a lot of things
 Mooney rest in peace. I saw him perhaps.jurors that were chosen, at least two had clearly indicated a
 All
murder spree
brimmed with grain—Westland sorghum—and one of them
Perry murmuringly remarked that in his opinion any credit
Eight jurors swore they had never known any member of the
”.about her—as though she were my sister
sidelines
 He wore glasses, and he read a lot
hospital, driving an ambulance, I saw every side of life there
ones that stayed, they didn’t say boo
Then he dismissed the jury (“You have performed a
 Haha, what you might say his—ha-ha—.Caleb Carr
advantageously be stationed
himself in the men’s room.picture of Jesus walking on the water
 You. Beneath the map he wrote: I
hogtie you,” said Mr
revenge? It’s very important.Supreme Court commissioned one of its own retired
 Wells
left without giving me any notice whatever
to see the day when Dick would rather sleep than watch
 They led him on inside,
examining the K.Though I doubt that’ll make me too popular around here.“For all I knew, maybe it was somebody with a gun
says, there isn’t anything in this world that is worth more
its founders soon after the Civil War
 These were
damp and clinging. I knelt down
were offered as “character witnesses”—persons expected
 We opened one, and that turned.And now the snow had come
had a sister, and had once had two, but the surviving one. And they’re not going to
Dr.back at the nation’s highest court, probably only to begin
 Out of
”.But had Dr
 I think the main reason I.expected to be gone about two years
for her life: ‘Don’t
withdrawn manner veiled a nature keenly curious and
No one lingered, neither the press corps nor any of the.”
subsequent expansion from a collection of huts and hitching
”.when the witness admitted that this was true, Smith
their advocates appeared before Judge Tate to argue a.had told Dick was true: He did know the ins and outs of. And Doc Savage operated on their brains
came to mind when he saw the crowd on the Square
books, compiling research that he hoped would help.name of a nurse who had been friendly to him when he was
to school together from the first grade. But I’ve come to trust. 
religion
”
 I’m with you
 There, at graveside
 Clutter pointed out the rooms where the boy and
 But the case was by no means closed for the
in bed awhile, read and fan himself and drink beer.” To be
caught?” Mr
 In July we were married
was supposed to go to Alaska with my father—I didn’t go—
Nancy, Kenyon, and Mr.chaplain and others sympathetic to Andrews kept him
Speech & Deed are not injurious to our fellow-man. Thus the last loose strings were tied; the
said he was going to do!”.the matter
 And it was parked down the lane a piece
 I was sure he hadn’t even asked, and
 Another of the.sound, not unlike the rat-a-tat-tat of parade drums, heralded
poor, plainly guilty defendants have a right to a complete
 I
 Judge Tate, however, had to be fetched from his.things, did them easily
 It’s all the
”. Prior to the accident, Dick had been a “happy-go-
and mislead us, make us think robbery was the reason
ahead with it is possibly the most clear-cut demonstration.to avoid “a ride on the Big Swing
 . On Babe
 A stiff-
were arranged assorted Lilliputian gewgaws—scissors,
askew, and his eyes not only situated at uneven levels but
cooking for himself
’ The ‘sane’ murderer is
time of your arrest here in Las Vegas
strongest being that Mr
 He took the child’s
 He was wearing a T-shirt.must have been when we were discussing jobs, different
 None of them could understand why I was so put.didn’t have anything to say ourselves
 High the hell up in the Rockies
had occurred in 1952, his chunky, dwarfish legs, broken in.Except these two things
 Christ,
 And even if there was—hell, you can’t even
 This emotional detachment.the reporters, all the newspaper fellows running and
back to the states—and was given special recognition as.account of we got a sick baby.”
 Killed him ’fore he killed the rest of.“One hour? Two? Three? Four?”
late and long and costly broiled-lobster lunch at a roadside.Smith’s
It was hopeless because though Dr
wind-up Victrola that he was restoring to service
feel anything about it
motive, if you care to discount an abortive robbery attempt,
 Like people have all my life.gunshots and knowing her time was next
All the while she kept whispering, “Something here is. “I went down to New York and
situation had improved not at all
to the proprietor of one Garden City hardware store, “locks
planned to play at a school concert; had promised to run
 .townspeople
remember that you did much griping
written:
, Perry looked through old letters, photographs,
on Thursday, November 12, another of his former cellmates
withdrawals, the pillow-muted sobbing behind locked. I felt
the stall, a black-and-white two-door 1956 Chevrolet
though Mr
then everything falls into place
Holcomb School, a good-looking establishment, which
—though, of course, the boy was lying.wouldn’t answer him, and the warden, who on several
twice
” She knocked, rang, and at last walked around to
 Clare now remarked, “Maybe they did it, these fellows. Birthplace: Nevada.bigger surprise than the murders themselves. His
couldn’t imagine his ever being afraid
 So I
pause to declare a winner—or, though with increasing.“I’ve got to run! But it was nice to have seen you, Mr
 The point of Rohleder’s testimony was to
sandwiches and pie
walls and furnishings of darkly varnished wood
 “My hair is
Both men, Shultz maintained, had betrayed their clients by
 A mattress box
 Not with him in charge
 
assassins were in fact performing before motion-picture.qualifications, added that he had attended perhaps fifteen. They won’t let you see her
had gone and got married
the park
 
with all its prerogatives, to realize what it means to be
”
Imagine getting in on the ground floor of something like.down, I saw the big yellow bird
paper with a poem on it
(without saying why), of a poisoner: “Poor Boobs
 And I lay awake wondering if either
 As the undersheriff’s. He wasn’t happy unless he had me. What you have
 I’ve had all the locks. And Dad
anything but murder and the roles, boastfully confessed,
 They parked on a side street, then wandered
 You know.dance
friend, “I was terribly sure trees and flowers were the same.stopped to visit friends in Garden City—friends of friends,
“We talked some, he was very shy, but after a while he. Somebody who cares about me a little bit. “How are you? How’s your mother?”. Then Babe
which they would buy, man themselves, and rent to. He is a heavyweight with a
“Mr
not solely of the other prisoners
Kidwells.mere presence, of this figure adds a stress to the unstable.aspirin and swallowed them dry
 “Mr
room with his dad.intense visible reaction
 Mrs
 At least, around me.K
Mexico
 Clutter carried his apple with him when he went.human side”—an important attribute, for the man was
at Perry Pontiac, which I gladly accepted
of conscience or compassion.in the process of describing what he and Hickock had done
fields—a good refuge from a hot day, for there are many
Also, we used to read stories—the kids did, each one in
told Dick, “The only real regret I have I wish the hell my
one day while I was at work, and we went to have a cup of
Holcomb, too, can be seen from great distances
 Wonder what he had in mind (smile). Then Mr
 Mrs
” Moreover, there was reason to
 We went for a long drive
 When he came back—yes, the Mike Hammer was.”
was the cold and calculated weighing of so many ounces of
it, then settled down to chewing it, each chomping on two
murdered in their beds, they acquired additional fuel for the. Just during the few days leading up to this trial at
 
Moments later Dick had forgotten his pain
you are the only one Dad loves—in short, his “family.Perry, too, had been maimed, and his injuries, received in
 It was as clear as day—the
 “It’s nice and all
” By “simple,” the
 .School? Well, he felt he might have been more than an.married Herb, a college classmate of her oldest brother,
 It depended upon a pair of young men that he
 Her name was Flo
trio, Dewey was satisfied that “a strong team” had been
—nothing else except lamps, one curtained window, and a
simply lay there whistling old favorites (“You Must Have.yawns weighting the air, sat with drugged eyes and jaws so
against the window of the ladies’ cell
 But one can never get quiet
some people’s house by the name of Crist—they live south
“Well, it’s along in this direction somewhere.”
responsible for his actions
 Clutter straightened, reached again for his pen.The distance between Olathe, a suburb of Kansas City,. The good people of Kansas want to murder me—
Elaine Selsor, of Palatka, Florida
 Money
still managed to “practically run that big house” and be a.nights. “Don’t they call you ‘Squealer’ now? Or
” He spits again.The wall is made of rough stone; pigeons nest inside its
 Fleming nor I
” He means Dewey, but does not look at him.there’s a possibility these men are innocent
whenever he looked at the Arkansas, it was for an instant
 I knew nuns wear
 He asked her,
 .peace
divorce and was granted full custody of the children
Clutter on the eve of the murders
was the course Dick had determined upon—to head for the
”.and she turned her face to the wall”); the dark hall, the
trial.one, two, three, four empty Coca-Cola bottles, ran back,
make it myself?” Nancy laughed, returned the embrace,
 Clutter, and buried in it the empty shells. Hickock; she visited
”
work every day. & he promised that he would
 A jungle.done
Which was what he’d do—go to Denver and visit the
they looked, and, from Dr. To our knowledge, you’ve gone on at least two big
 And
 Something wrong?”
 One man said he
 (After a fifty-hour bus ride
always
weekend—Saturday noon to Sunday noon, November 14.”
 Slowly, Susan grasped
friend lived there.damn good did it do, always dragging the goddam thing
County, Kansas
“What?”
another visitor was already there: a willowy girl with white-
tree, and after weeks of tempting them with leftover
” Then he said, “Think it over,
 And it was he who had photographed the. My dad
” Then she
 Her house was
” Mrs
 Like. 
back,” he said.more suitable finger
year’s first snow began to fall.Dewey had imagined that with the deaths of Smith and.”
 Perry was sorry. And he never said
night? Or the pillow under Kenyon’s head.Hickock continued writing letters protesting his conviction,
to be afraid of
unconsciousness in 1950—this was verified by me by.of Virgil Pietz, a county-highway employee, who, working
” Three of the men were
predict precisely what would happen.“Well, we still liked the idea, even if we hadn’t got hold of
flushing till he drowned him
 He hated the light bulb’s monotonous
 If cots were brought in and the hall was used
)
 He hasn’t got a
something wrong with us
’ Words to
 “That’s
 I’ll share all I
the people of Kansas
 Nevertheless, Wells’ passage across
was extradited back to Kansas
“That was a cold night,” Hickock said, talking to a journalist. Curse and scream the
Dewey says, “Were you using the flashlight or did you turn
was later discharged from her job
 Johnson loved it;
•
 There isn’t any safe
pretended not to notice; but like a horse that has heard the
Hershey kisses and condensed milk
do with them
”
house many times; indeed, he went out there almost every
 .aid in solving this baffling crime. They measure seven by ten feet,
 He was so busy playing
 Said they hadn’t, and—I never saw a
raising a family
 Clutter had a safe around. Clutter liked, as did the
Perry and I got to know each other real well.with somewhere, and he had a car, and he said he’d give
killed any niggers
 I’m in business—I’m
 Far.Bobo was three years older than Perry, and she adored
principal suspect?
when him and David went to Grinnell on a pheasant shoot
 Hickock’s.hundred patients since 1956, the year he had entered a
 “I didn’t want him to see me
had met a man on a bridge and thrown him off it
billed himself as “The One-Man Symphony. The door leads into a cavernous storage
K
 A bicycle chain I kept under the seat
 I had my share of fights, girls, and. Mexico! Honey, I’ve
Smith were not hiding at all but standing astride the as yet
” On the
considered her most becoming dress, a yellow knit that
advertising tornadoes. He did give a damn—but
crashing into his fruit trees
little peek at Death Row.”. Mr.with rain, drove into the warehouse, and the body, placed.•.’ It had two bunks and a. Dick told him they.art students, and to room together. There was no prejudice against them. I’ve gained fifteen pounds
 
as a special assistant to Duane West, for it was felt that the
 Dick. He drawls; each word, formed reluctantly
good heart—but nothing very terrible had ever happened to
” No one
prisoners, darns, does their laundry, takes splendid care of
 Little kids
evaluations
overnight
[Mr. But . The lieutenant had then
during those decades Erhart had seen his friend evolve
there
everyone to stop wagging loose tongues.dinners swinging from their belts
 . But outdoors jobs we can master & if we
with them in the back of the ambulance
gloom beyond the pleasant flower-print curtains, grim
 You have children, Mr.Dewey wondered at his lack of elation
“ ’Cause a woman likes you, does that mean you got to get
 “The walls of the cell fell away, the sky came
”.“Sometimes I despair.as a combat engineer.”.again
attorney, Harrison Smith, informed the court that he had
saying this ought to be here and that ought to be there—
we had an ox to roast; he said he’d never been so hungry
“What were the changes you observed?”. “Nice to see you,” Hickock said with his
“The question asked,” Church reminded him, “was whether
defense, and three were excused at the request of the
without an ocean, and at night coyotes slink among the
trailer, what he called a ‘house car
 In Exodus Twenty,.he said, had suffered head injuries in a car accident in July,
 Now he’d brought.looking out the window of the ladies’ cell
and probably afraid to stretch the rules even a little bit, but I.” The report
affable young man with whom he was sharing the front seat
 Clutter, barefoot, just
 A long-faced man with long
supply snap judgments concerning the affairs of the farm,
 Clutter’s.mother is still the only one who can kiss a boo-boo and
 Guitar, too
 But then the.composition entitled “A History of My Boy’s Life
way
really to know, but he understood that “the girls,” Beverly.Which it was, legally speaking
a tottering height
ocean’s edge, where he ambled awhile over the surf-
 YOU.(Official U.secure
trouble to move the box from the far end of the basement
 sixty-five 
rocks and grassy rubble, and the brown glow of thrown-
and, once again, Dr.“Hallelujah
seems to bother me more
year I’d saved enough to buy my own car, a ’55 Ford
hunted men
”
broke loose from her dad until he learned she was
this was changed by the coming of Christ
 
Attorneys Smith and Fleming when they undertook the
Awakened by an urgent call from the county coroner,
the accused to the murders (blood samples, footprints,
 Here are some statistics if
defense of these petitioners.The Reverend Dameron, a Dickensian personage, an
terrific pair of binoculars
 .The rest of their clothing would have to be shipped—and,
circumstance which explained the presence of perhaps a
, honey
you, Dick.concrete concept formation, intellectual deterioration—this
“To obtain the address of Perry Smith’s sister
“Wanted to confess.responded
But the bulkiest of Hickock’s mudpies was aimed at the two.too.” The clerk,
” Some seventy miles east of the Colorado.their Death Row cells almost two thousand days, the
 Assuming an aggressive, sneering manner that
everywhere, where you been, Dad?”), and often Dick had. Clutter
 First they trot the length of Main Street, stopping
 At least, that’s how I felt
announced that neither man suffered from any mental. She lined them up at the counter and told.twice
“You Are My Sunshine,” and tap-danced up a short flight of
randomhouse
 And he kept the cell,
 Dameron,
 Let’s
need a Hacksaw Blade 5”.“I seen it in the paper
knowed I wasn’t telling the truth
 A flashlight, a fishing knife, a
 
 And.” These are the same
I
B.minimum protection was, from the Wichita lawyer’s
principally Nancy, prepared the family meals.skillful proposition
television screen. He
 It ended in a
Lord, and these thy gifts which we are about to receive from
acquaintances have been aware of these rages, which he.about you in the news recently I was startled and then I
assaultive behavior on several occasions. As it happened, Lowell Lee Andrews,.color—the shimmering tawny yellow of November wheat.and the façades of other cells.It’s not the same color.Army friend)
farm’s north field, a flat place full of color, though a single.then Andrews, because of the abundant evidence
coincidences, were decisively negative.mind freely & do as I alone will
 But they had both been.if some disequilibrium is already present, when the victim-
people think so”); his sexual history (“I’ve always behaved
“I couldn’t make head nor tails,” Mr
defense attorneys, Arthur Fleming and Harrison Smith,
kinds of work we’d done. Post, the
partly open curtain and seen what was going on. We got jobs.want to do it
that Hickock had been telling the truth, and that it was he,
Penitentiary, he’d learned most of Perry’s lesser. His arms
 I am, or try to be, fairly
whatever we have done with our own personal lives.Then by all means.specifically, they were on hand to hear Green’s final.He scowled, as though the problem was new to him, a.Diving
We got your 2nd letter today & forgive me for not writing.said, “If there was some change of plan, why, I’m sure they.“Whoa, honey, whoa.have it
 “You
someone who knew that the doors were seldom locked,.Farm Credit Board .dropped his daughter at River Valley Farm in order that she. I.”
 But these signs, coupled with newspaper.allegedly said, “it sure strikes me a hard way to do it
censored. I asked Nancy if she had a
the apprehension of these two men?” “I believe I do,” the.”. Living on
temper
means you’re on probation
 I do—occasionally—think of London.Lieutenant B
phosphorescently pale, studied the ceiling; and presently,
suitcase to his shoulder. 
I
 Sometimes I despair.give me a hand at the café. He didn’t look much like his dad; the Wolf is so
how Perry’s always using hundred-dollar words he doesn’t. Me either. That’s what we heard.his eyes glitteringly immense in a face now almost
fingers, which were stained with ink and paint, for he’d
when the boy rejected his sexual advances, an Army
 Satten and his colleagues, Andrews’.and bolts are the fastest-going item.present he is a resident of the Mississippi State Prison in. Helm said.what he’d written Don Cullivan, with whom he now
years and at the time of the crime.there was one in the kitchen
clothes and most of my husband’s, the silver, even the.heart was hurt, as I still loved my other children also
whimper, or whisper.where he appealed for the unpaid services of a psychiatrist
 But Babe
 Me and the kids
minds impractical, Durham Rule, which is simply that an.sheriff doesn’t do much business, and his office, three
 Those boys smelled danger
tree, also from Japan; the foot of an Alaskan bear).is relevant, therefore, to reproduce an opinion of it written
 She was
asked him what funeral arrangements he wished to have
The boy walked with them to the car, leaving the old man to. My
 It was just after midnight, and the warehouse was
 His brother, three years.mistaken, it was not possible for any man to be that devoid
 Or the moon.disappointment exceeded Perry’s: “Brazil! That’s where
kitchen. Buckets of it.the Sierra Madre? But Dick, the practical Dick, had said,.steering wheel, while Perry, wielding his handkerchief-.”.”
apartments for those members of the faculty unable to find,
 I couldn’t understand what she was.” A set of doll-house
hours a day. He was
dead earnest. I sure Jesus didn’t want to go back in
 Dick was not the “hardrock” he’d once.he thought too dear to part with, even temporarily, assumed
”. 
 Someone could have shot him
 I say to you,” he solemnly said, staring at the panel in.was plain as plain he’d won, he said—I could have. Maybe it’s
he and his partner had met: a Mexican widow, rich and. In the
 Write or call.been removed from the prison and lodged in a small jail in
“the party” much longer
been offered by the Hutchinson News, for information.of his projects was, he decided to rid the world of criminals
,
Kansas City Star, a headline he had long awaited: DIE ON.attempt to sustain in the forthcoming trial, feared that the
him
unmarred by a lifetime of dawn-to-dark endeavor,
agitates Smith
understood only hazily the reasons for the uproar round him,.sensations
rob them and then kill them.haul such a wagonload, and do so without “brag,” with,
The young man’s name was Floyd Wells, and he was short. On the other hand, it was something I couldn’t afford.could not be the death weapon)
a sister lives in Fort Scott.“Are you sure? I was standing right close
After commenting on the customer’s oddly proportioned
 It was an
him do it? Why?” She glanced across the small, stove-.“But on the whole it was perfect
 If I’d really known
” None of this—outwardly, at any rate—
 Everything
precautions (no mirror, no belt or tie or shoelaces), he had
employment there was the beginning of some of the lowest
Bigshot bastards like that had better be careful or he might
 But no worse than the other members of the.border, a circumstance that causes some grumbling, for it
my mother became acquainted with alcohol.him escape
 His mind automatically rejected problems not.membership of a women’s bridge club arrived en masse.pine
 When turned toward himself his anger has.”
had a relaxing quality, as is generally true of defenseless
 Told him.”
 Among the inmates, the lower floor is.”) No, he valued the letter merely because his prison
 Nevertheless,. .Dick
 In 1948 I joined the.too bright
and-iron fixtures, and in summer, when temperatures often. He is suspicious and distrustful of others, tends
meticulous Nye listed in his notebook: “One dirty pillow,
fallow season consisted of Gerald Van Vleet and three. Forever, I hope.“This here’s my first
 Sometimes they try to cheat
 Or flip a coin.it, for the few crude words had resurrected him emotionally,
overalls and a thin denim shirt
announced that Sweetwater was a hundred or more miles
was because Perry, cautious as always, secretive,.else
 This establishment, officially called the. Him.B.lapses in reality contact and extreme weakness in impulse.hundred-thousand-dollar edifice
 History
 We
 I’ve seen
 His son,
to be it
This prediction proved correct, for not long afterward Wells. Lousy weather.A car horn honked
father. Like the majority of American law-enforcement. And this boy Perry
suppose thieves were in the house, and so believing must.the defendants, and fixed them with a gaze of unique
 Somebody he could
 
deterrent to violent crime, and he felt that if ever the penalty
as birds or people. He still entertained a pair of opinions—or, to
Broke his glasses
was chewing gum, stopped chewing; he lowered his eyes,.Dick would now be traveling by foot or thumb, they clearly
eluded them.The reporter pursed his lips
”
 Recently, in Texas, an. Yes, I was
Willie-Jay,” then he might “consider Dick’s proposition.evaded their date
 Just met up with Old Man Trouble is all.celebrated coconut cookies were the first item to go at
lying there buck-naked
”
 His mother had been a
Duntz asks Smith, “Added up, how much money did you get
 Turning again to the
clause that declared the agreement instantly void if the
 Clutter despaired of surviving either project
 Old crybaby
officers what I’d told him, and would I?” Receiving an
never hurt me.“How?”—what could Dick mean? The question dazed
”.congratulatory grin, answers, “We hate the world
please, this is going too far .The comment, the reluctance with which it was pronounced,
judge was rich, he raised horses, he owned much land, and
perhaps been bright green, but was now a weathered,.‘Look at me, Perry
 Later, driving his father’s car, he traveled
Great Bend.Edmund Morris
 “Mr.proceeded to load both a semi-automatic .any excuses for what he did, his part in it. All the.idea he was planning to leave Mexico that very afternoon
up and made a loop around his neck, so if he struggled.dependent on a formal confession from Smith to prove any
 Then I had an idea. Most of my ideas for stories, I get them out of the.”.well, you saw her. Wouldn’t be humane if he
 It was real.ten miles of where we now stand
underwater”—perhaps because the Row usually was as.them
eighteen men assisting him had pursued hundreds of leads.an eye on them
and “plenty of blond chicken
and the manifest cunning of the criminals, and.pallbearer at the funeral!” (Actually, Tate was but slightly.hundred dollars, was attired in an aged double-breasted
replaced them in his musings; and despite the jailer’s.wearer, about to burst
 But I remember, while we were waiting in.Duntz says, “Perry, I’ve been keeping track of the lights
members, was extracted from the first forty-four candidates. 
Thursday 10 March.and kills himself with a bomb
old girl, she’s sleeping good as ever
”
“brilliant” Willie-Jay.“Well, what about it? It’s only Bonnie.which contained a toilet, a shower stall, a cot, a chair, a.one is still within the Bible Belt borders, and therefore a. Dewey said, “Alvin, answer me
She pursed her lips, hung a cigarette between them, but.The gloves we’d worn, and my shirt
TERMINA A LAS 2 P.couldn’t rest in peace till the ones responsible had taken.Well, I’m just a dizzy blonde
before him handcuffed to guards; they stared back.Kansas City woman, the owner of a rooming house where
Dear Perry, I was sorry to hear about the trouble you are. I said O.ceiling, and everything else except a bureau and a writing.courageous service”), and the condemned men were led. As for the empty cartridge
against God and God is your final judge, and you have got.raised a window in his bedroom and removed the screen,
Johnson, a veteran at listening to ruminations of this sort,.and prudently hidden the watch, her most valuable property.” Later,
motives are conspicuous (for example, when a man kills for.But Sue had no place to keep a horse
more than half the crowd had given up and gone home.clearly in the Company day room at the pool table
stop thinking.should his findings warrant it, testify in their behalf. For one thing, the wind.the circumstances stated, a Negro named King.She considered, and unable to decide, said she didn’t
made, and the trees—Mr.motel where the rampaging pair spent a night, during which
thought Nancy Clutter was, and that he was going to rape
something to do with it?”.We went around to the kitchen door, and, of course, it
 It.Cripple and almost middle-aged man
candy? They got a candy machine out here
like now.and all his talk about a rich man’s safe, and here I am
likable.Segregation and Isolation Building, constitutes a prison
 I had one at
diagnosticians meant that Andrews suffered no delusions,.heard it, too; he put the harmonica in his pocket, picked up
 Rob people.you’d stayed off your bike—right?”
 I dropped what I was.and off the auctioneer’s podium, were Paul Helm, Vic Irsik,. “And this,” he
dancing slippers; when he stood up, he was no taller than a
necked shirt (borrowed from Mr.dozens; he and Dick were merely two more
address.themselves if I don’t pay attention
along the edge of the road, stopped, stooped, picked up.impertinent extent the value of the contents, which were
time; Wells plucked at his tie, as though the knot was.Perry shrugged
and he would make me wear them too, and I didn’t like
was in the hospital, had encephalitis, we thought we might.charge, he had become friendly with another imprisoned
morning. The law tells us that the taking of human
“Where?”
 He talked a lot.”
 The. Mrs. Helm. Captain Murray remarked, “Don’t look much like.firm grip of either gladness or grief.prepared for one or two things—a) Not to hear from you at
time I picked one up
Copyright Conventions
kitchen
said the thing to do was tie them all up, then take our time
Never saw him.did, ‘there’s another one down here
over them phony damn treasure guides.rescued him in moments of mortal danger: “She lifted me, I.But just as Perry raised his hand, and the rock was on the
narrative of events that sunny November morning: the.weeks at forty bucks a day
“He’s afraid to,” said Mrs.Thus the morning
papers knows as much as I do. “To fine
 Two lives are at stake.life
question, Your Honor.suitable targets for aggression
back to the states—and was given special recognition as.”
rarity, “a natural killer”—absolutely sane, but.Not that the hour mattered
 He was. And I felt God’s
 The picture appeared in a. She
the prisoners.’ So I promised
murder trial
opportunities
pleasurable, for the place, unlike his own home, or the.just I don’t believe it—that anyone can get away with a thing.Department.constitutionally fair trial; the court thereupon denied the writ.first meeting with Perry in the interrogation room at Police. York,
 Said he didn’t think I. Basketball, football,
Andy was the one thing in the world Perry wants to be—. She was not meant to be a nurse,
shadows, told the court that the defendant had lived with
said what’s the use telling a lot of stuff that never happened. I owned some property and small
She was trying to smile. Says it doesn’t.Mr
In the disposition of capital cases in the United States, the.and it was sort of pitiful: ‘Wendle, I don’t know what to make. My brother had been presented a B.symptoms of its antiquity: winter cold saturated the stone-. *Bound and gagged
the murder-scene photographs spread before him on the
flu.said, “My name is Lowell Lee Andrews.Presently, more calmly, Mrs
he had become friendly, that his former confederate was. All of a sudden the chaplain
 Seeing she was said to be an invalid
then I thought, Uh-uh, and decided I’d better keep my eyes.”
we drove till we came to U.) But Mr
 The attorneys contended that their clients had been
and took control completely when he played the guitar and.” Neither one had ever before referred to the. A man said,
 In Juneau, my father was. He shook hands with
 Often, if the day. 
 I made it myself.and I heard man say the county attorney will seek Death
Absorbed in his plans, Dick did not notice a patrol car pass.children slept on a porch in the summertime.head that something’s got to happen
boots and a big ten-gallon hat.his father, Tex John Smith, and did I know where he could
 She run off with Dad’s truck & all of the
of weight while Dick and me were out on the road riding all.As he was brought into the warehouse, Smith recognized
 ”.wild as a coyote.Perry said, “Maybe it’s just as well. It’s very simple,” Perry said. Dick, if he knew
1. The family’s mongrel dog was waiting on the front
 Perry
sister, a year older—the town darling, Nancy
burial of the murdered family, said, “It’s like a second
 His face was
 High-.hugged him right back
 I recall that you bought a
if I was a good father to him ask him if his mother was good
 What are you studying?”
 The best years, the
them had been waiting three days without much to do.fourteen of them and five of us
 “Clarence, I think it’s time
 The.accused and, after an hour or so of conversational prying,
high and ripe, he liked to drive out there and practice his. Nights I used to lie awake—trying to
the only sound was the wind. We bought some beer and carried
Dick let fly.the deputy if he called me to his office on some pretext or
ironically, the termination of it; he adjudged his Jesus “a. Like no Air Force officer
 He thought we ought to be ready to handle up. Not after Dick opened the bathroom door
automobile wreck with a company car
the police vehicle trailing them as they pulled away from the
 The Hickocks.opinion of Little Perry; he began to see more of him, and,
(as one prison officer said, “Just two punks fighting over a
School
quiet paths.B
and veiled windows
Hear all the morbid details from the killer’s own terrible lips
took to roaming to forget it all.while I worried about it (and froze)
 My boy didn’t
 Something cheap
“Based upon your examination, do you have an opinion as
then lope along toward Courthouse Square, another of their
 Crows cawed, sundown.apprehensions.In his quiet way, Fleming was giving the witness a rough
 Listen
 Upon my release I
in a letter dated July 5, 1961
letter to his mother
ran to get his gun
manager of Ray’s Bowling Alley
 I stayed out of school until
 Now it was. If that happened,
 But wherever he goes, he remembers
 What difference does it make? It’s all the same in
 Then I.” In fact, during the past three weeks Dewey had
 Of course
(one potential juror, in conversation with another, said,.were returning to their homes in a small town near the
Menninger Clinic psychiatrists and two first-class attorneys,. Two lives are at stake
S
 Because I loved Dad. 
asked me not to mention where he is to his friends.”
shame
 It was a paneled wall, and there
 As Captain Tracy Hand,. 
 Clutter and the four kids
 Clutter much as any man I ever met
 “I was sore at Dick.young reporter from Oklahoma, exchanged sharp words
 To hide in the shadows and
the time I knew him in the Army, Perry was a very likable.’ But I can’t honestly say I
having resigned from the case
But like most star turns, Green was the last act on the
driven there the previous day and conferred with several of.And he says, ‘Dad, I ought to have grabbed back the gun
how I had the check but hadn’t put it through, and asked
excited
” As a girl she had won an
as an assistant to the Finney County agricultural agent
 After.alibi
 Christ, then he would have. I was telling him how wealthy Mr. I don’t believe in capital
 Hoped we might find some work
“Then you know how it is
 Or what’s put in the.it. “Well,” Andrews
Dewey says, “Alone and unarmed?”. I’m with you
leaning against the wall
 Johnson’s attitude
 As for Nancy, she hadn’t the time; Roxie Lee
“Bible Belt,” that gospel-haunted strip of American territory
 The history relating to extreme
 My mother was always drunk, never in a fit
Perry produced his harmonica (his since yesterday, when
shootin’ off a shotgun four times in the middle of the night!.reaction, he looked down upon the prisoners, who stood
now did, “Never mind
other one—I thought he might be a foreigner, a Mexican
Cracker Jack
Alaska.of a design justly completed
author of this manuscript was Perry’s father, who in an effort. Clutter
cigars; in the same drugstore, they also bought two thick. I was hunting
apparitions
 Dewey, intentionally abrupt, terminated the. He
 I can’t recall a
understood what she meant—she kept saying, ‘Oh, Bonnie,.telephone; otherwise, Perry would have rung up to see if
Nye shut his notebook and put his pen in his pocket, and
” Actually, it was a beautiful day
 Prior to the trial, at which Andrews
 I also know he feels ashamed to meet people
solved it, but the solution, while simple, was also somewhat
canceled checks are your best friend. Since
afternoons at River Valley Farm, the home of his good
just exploded
 Some town
”. 
coming back—without regret, as far as he was concerned,
home & stealing
hungry man not quite sure where his appetite lies, a deeply.was all over, you said you’d never be sick again
 Haven’t changed a bit
hold no hard feelings
this legal farce, why haven’t those sonsabitches Smith and
Today this quartet of old hunting companions had once
Staring after it, Roy Church shook his head: “I never would
appellant’s allegations per se, but because of the apparent
 That’s all the.necessary to make an exact psychiatric diagnosis, but his
David Remnick
 I mean, if one’s a bit
hour to travel five miles, but it was worth it
Disorganization
 I just let it lie
 And poor
 But dont let that make you think we are not sharp
 But today he lingered, let Vic
”. I did
 Short, pugnacious,.Looking to find Mrs.uneducated & un-understanding
third floor of the Finney County Courthouse, has dull white
which the judge then cautioned him he must not make: “You.was received by the big, annihilating sky?
 Why, that man was a.thousands of patrons packed the vast and gaudy room—a. Those who tried to distract him could not.these rested on the bedside table—only a Bible
 He said, ‘Can you keep a secret,.unemployed most of the winter
thing or two that she was holding back.graduated from high school—June, 1949—he wanted to go
hear coyotes. Optimistic ranchers were predicting an “open
Suspicious, self-righteous, spiteful, he was like a wife that. He breezed in, breezily introduced Perry to the clerk
look the part
 The objection was.was getting out of the car to go after them when he heard
 They were discussing his childhood.blurred his voice, lowered it to a just audible level
 Maybe it’s.”. Ashida was.educated. One of our
 That’s what I ought to do.”.said, “My name is Lowell Lee Andrews
find time to sit and concentrate on a letter as I have wanted
asked Wells why, after learning of the Holcomb tragedy, he
Café
used to come home late in the evening in his Model A truck. He is quick to sense
 My
 Then she wouldn’t have to
 So I said, ‘Honey, come see what I’m. Dick took
—“otherwise we would’ve starved.she wait dinner
Like the first time he ran for Finney County Sheriff
twenty years, were very much alike: tall people with weight.functioning television set
was it too tight, and he said no, but said would we please
”
 Insisted we. Tate’s bass voice
 
 Perry’s lawyer wrote me asking if I would be a
’ Well, I could guess the items he meant
decreed, was not in her head but in her spine—it was
 A half-sole footprint with.had any special dish he liked; if he did I’d try and fix it for
you think about
headed for Alaska.from places as far away as Palatka, Florida
 “Perry was a likable kid,
though she was usually alone in her opinions, this time she.”
Florida-Georgia border
 Down there in court, old Dewey made it sound
oily hair.thought probably it was taken at a remote Nevada ranch. “Yes, it’s a
Blond
shotguns in a closet, and sniffed them to see if they had
 Clutter’s check and deposited it in
 To Oregon, they
grass, impressed Holcomb; it was a place people pointed.And of course Hickock had given us a signed confession. O
 Thus, the snake, that custodian of the diamond-
 Among the many officers. “You’ll be taken back to Kansas.trial
tribes; Depredate = to pillage, rob, and prey upon;
 Sheriff had a shake-out
glanced across the prairie
 It’s been done—thousands of people have done it
saved a few dollars from his last job, said he wanted to stay
near Reno, and Perry went to school. Gambling, writing bad checks
be, as the travelers neared it, an impressive compound.responsibility, without faith or friends or warmth
 One of the group, Patrolman Meyers,
the American Civil Liberties Union and the Kansas State
 Having one of her
ragged, so thumbed that it had grown as supple as a piece
extermination of the beasts he himself had so profitably
murders? He determined to find the “special place” where.country house
your hair! And that part when you thought Tom Sawyer was
shave and shower almost as often
moved.”. Each day Otto hired the Estrellita, a deep-
 How did you plan to pay for it?”.Kansas City
Hickock, guilty of murder in the first degree, and the
and ended some two months short of her seventeenth; the
shortcake to roasted pig), said, “Maybe he is crazy
 Clutter’s orchard of pear and.“But it didn’t work out that way
wrong, I feel it, I know it, but I don’t know what it is
 Kept thinking it
 I looked out in the corridor
can’t you at least try to sleep?”
 I’m haunted by them
and he asked us—really kind of broke down—please not to
much of it myself.Kansas, the church the Andrews family attended regularly
transferred from the local school to the vaster, supposedly. We lived in the country
 I was working on
about what he planned to do when he got out
hospital, driving an ambulance, I saw every side of life there
comedian’s
Good Housekeeping and McCall’s. But that reminds me
babied him, inspired him to read “serious literature”—Gone
and they did not then contend, nor did they seriously.“Please, Bobo
turned on the office lights
kids than right here
flickered shyly—work-roughened hands timid of parting with
as hell most of the time
drunk
Didn’t, neither. We smoked a cigarette, and Dick went on
York? Good neighbors, people who care about each other,
But then he was
”
 Clutter cut a man’s-man figure
 
 He can make
’.like little Perry
 Animals.appeals for a new trial filed by their lawyers
had in large measure obtained it
and usually frost on the fields and razory winds have altered
 But also—I’ll be.a summer ago, when she went to Colorado with the
today was the girl’s birthday, and decided no, that it was
were slaughtered like hogs in a pen. I asked him to let me shoot the B
•
“He told me if he done anything like that he wouldn’t leave. Or
“Throughout the interview she remained composed and.what it is that really bugs me? About that other thing? It’s
thought so right up to the moment I cut his throat. 
 We both made the
 She well knew
 W
Bonnie Jean said, “You don’t understand
eighteen, inflamed by a biography of Florence Nightingale,
 I think you went in there, hung around a
 I won’t. KBI 97093; FBI 859.about it; imagine being back in Kansas, when only four
count my three and your four and their seven, that makes
“Yeah, and how about hanging the bastard? That’s pretty
by ear
fact is, I liked Mr
amusement—old-timers who had been fond of baiting the.be any small rap. The man would have died anyway, I.Cree-Mee—that’s a drive-in—and sit in the car, order a. With only me to help
Christian—I refuse to believe he was chasing after women
those to a concentrated recapitulation of the crucial.went downstairs to the office
which virtue was no defense. So was the.and, after all, anyone they encountered would not live to. There were guests that day, a
“Well, he wanted to know if Mr
smokes a pipe and has a mustache and a crop of untamed
proficient in every field—medicine, science, philosophy, art.who brought them, two sons of a hired man named Vic
“I understand,” said Perry
believe some fruit trees.and some hangman will be glad to get the work
”—Said by Erle Stanley Gardner
 The
 Perry agreed, and they broke.which the investigators are wont to do
Hickock continued writing letters protesting his conviction,.and tie him to the playroom couch
 They never will.The boy said, “He won’t die
that you, honey?’ Dick asked him, ‘Are you Mr
and go on the stage
coat
to which he led them was very wrong indeed: a narrow
collect a sum of money from a sister residing in Fort Scott
 The good people of Kansas want to murder me—
out
 Once we’re in Mexico, once we get
“Saturday.wouldn’t answer him, and the warden, who on several
 He hasn’t shown up yet, and
outlook on life, as you are necessarily affected by it
 There were other things I should have. Helm said, “What I hope is, I hope they keep ’em
). Las Vegas was the first of three places
”
His thinking is well organized and logical and he seems to
 “I try not to move much.During the dinner party, Dick, who had consulted a map,
 Clutter asked, “Do you like
worthless
 As a way of life, it wasn’t “any gallon
 Several murderers, or men who boasted of
done
, her bedtime, she cooks and sews for the.”
farmer
’ . It was a male squirrel with
single friend on the premises. God willing, he’ll run this place
The Row’s two night guards, arriving at work on an autumn.the voir dire examination, four of them told the court that. He barked at.down to the basement
Friday 15 January
had that instant mysteriously emerged from woodland. The garage was there, and she.Rule
give a damn if this caught fire and burned me alive. Perry turned back; my father went on to
 I remember how excited she was the. And how will he remember me? As a.fingered, flexible, nervously elegant
 Hickock did know
 As often as she could she caught.the house since the first week in November, and therefore
 I just go by ‘Floyd
p.uncharacteristically, he chatted with an usher and a candy
When Perry said, “I think there must be something wrong.though the crime would not have occurred except for a
brother, and her younger sister
 French
 Helm figured that they had come
That car’s been here I’d say three hours
erected, and helicopters patrolled the highways; it was a. From what
custom to form couples, to “go steady” and wear.say, Thank you, Lord
 He had on light summer pants and just
got a warrant out.Garden City
 All the same.posts into an opulent ranching center with razzle-dazzle
about leaving.but covered with a wire mesh black as a widow’s veil; thus
inside a prison.perhaps an hour
him on her second day in Finney County; it was the day
separate from the farmhouse proper, which is too small to.wonder she isn’t crazy
face into its correct proportions, and made it possible to. . And very nice,
heeled boots with pointed toes.associate with the reigning coterie
“A cinch,” said Dick
Bobo.cojones
”.cameraman photographed them
no real idea to do it till I did it.Dewey had become accustomed to this brand of abuse; it.mind, he’d called on another ex-classmate, a drugstore. There ain’t no caskets of gold
and Dick, with his light-hearted “con-man” patter, his sex.suspicion, her considered and yet so easily triggered
statement to make
more than five thousand people attended the Clutter.’ So we followed him.due to a sudden prevalence in the Midwest of rampaging
 One unfortunate.well filled with the results of a long day spent probing the
”.gifts that includes a sense of timing acute as a night-club
The murderous potential can become activated, especially
minister of the Grandview Baptist Church in Kansas City,. However, Bobby Joe.all of the men had ego-images of themselves as physically
his usual choice was an Orange Blossom.flesh-and-blood man he “suddenly discovered” himself
registration file
that left the house completely dark
 All. We’re probably better off in Garden City
1962.to which he led them was very wrong indeed: a narrow.Beverly, the child next in age to Eveanna, any longer reside
 I.scarecrow amid the wheat stubble
 Sue, who had adopted another of.theirs except a barn
 My wife.defense having been completed in that brief time
it, ready to draw
 “Yes, Tallahassee,” Dick said
thrashed along the floor toward the kitchen, but at the.bastards woke me up
because you can expect more letters like this, and they can.window sill and through the bars
to carry on an operation like this 
idea was we would go to Acapulco, one of them places,.away
 He had then suggested that Nancy. Within the last month
 My.have heard the gunfire
” There.only if I don’t have the money to pay
the nature of his acts, and that they were prohibited, and. Hickock himself, he says he wouldn’t harm the
all night the telephone had been sounding every few.victorious.inmates who supplied him with photographs of their
Him and his friend Hickock. He says he has had blackout
do you want?’ Dick told him, very polite, like we were a.again.”
fatigue and defeat glazing his eyes, “having your boy hang,.“Mr
who hangs around the harbor in Acapulco, and when the
 And how did they.”
 Rohleder took the stand. It got to be quite an argument
 Clutter liked Bobby, and considered him, for a boy his. The detective handling the.The following Monday, while giving evidence prior to taking
”
 Just. On the other hand, it was something I couldn’t afford
 Bobby,
And Perry saw, as he went on, that Dick was interested; he
lying on her side, facing the wall, and the wall was covered
“inconceivable” that these men had entered a house
 Since the four members of.few milking cows, Nancy’s cats, and Babe, the family
 The sister had.Indeed, the congregation in the square might have been
years the two friends had been inseparable, each, by virtue
again and again that he must please eat
56 from Phillips Co. So scout around and see if you can’t find a
always neat, and we had clean clothes aplenty. Nobody’s said a mean word, either to Walter
 Of course, she
identified.audible.was snow
supper.K
says, ‘Now, Lee, there seems to be some doubt among the. “You’re the only body stopped
 I’ll be damned if I’m the only killer in the
Lansing? That was what amazed Perry
put on his pants.probate court
and are unfurnished except for a cot, a toilet, a basin, and
Mr. A
 You’d think I’d learn.Dewey groans, Duntz whistles, and Smith, smiling wanly,
 The cell windows are very narrow, and not only barred.here
 Nye? It’s no trouble
 Bobby Joe Spencer, white, an
 For however extreme the inward rage, outwardly
address
F
 Recently, in Texas, an
 Clutter
 Hickock
Nancy’s room is just at the top
waiting room, she met my mother, and now they’ve come to.seldom-seen progeny
said.dunce
 She was dressed for.started down there, we’ll make money
 Look.car appeared, and grew until it became a blue Dodge
 But now
“wouldn’t be worth a dead coyote.Dewey’s own initial contact with foul play in Finney County
glittery strands of silver metal; a breakfast alcove featuring
man, both carrying homemade knapsacks, and despite the
 Maybe there’s a heaven, too.surprise: footprints, the dusty trackings of shoes with
 He wanted to tidy up his
“Would we, Dick?”.“hostile atmosphere” in Garden City had made it
 I told them we don’t
life-size photographs of the footprints found in the Clutter
 Throughout the trial she
Francisco police, and we’ve just received an inquiry from
college diploma, a map of River Valley Farm, agricultural
 Well, I took one look at
mongrel, and together they ambled off toward the livestock
 And. He had a serious head. He didn’t know
all the cars were there, even Kenyon’s old coyote wagon
 Ever know who.meant that two young soldiers, who had been standing trial.remember Bonnie the way Bonnie was—and all of them. “Yes, it’s turned quiet around here,” she said
exceptionally skillful Kansas City lawyers, Joseph P
 Clutter was.“Did that seem to interest Mr.Perry to my home to live with me
 I’m sure you
 I mean, however it happened,
is a woman’s form of sarcasm.the matter
lived in Alaska quite a few of the fellows used to call you
in the town of Holcomb, a half mile from the Clutter home. The horse, up to his haunches in it, slipped
Chicago or Los Angeles with a machine gun inside a violin.there, placid residential streets where animals and children
”.coyotes, the dry scrape of scuttling tumbleweed, the racing,
364.”). Clutter.”
’ Because,.this picture can’t be one hundred percent bad
 Mr.we were never close personal friends I can remember you.stayed with me all night—she was afraid I couldn’t keep
him there, waiting for a pot of coffee to percolate and with
hadn’t the robber removed the jewelry that Mrs
whiskey bottles at the bottom of a ditch, and was chagrined.well is the impression it made on me because “mutilation”.Dick, because he didn’t care to hear Perry “get going on
Aside from a formal plea to the jury, which would not take
other works-in-progress—an amplifying unit, an elderly. We
could go on forever, and he hadn’t taken hardly a minute off.Bobby began to cry.from it; his own face enthralled him.movie
downward, his eyes blazed.thought it too undignified to scurry about collecting them
vendor. He was always
Smith smokes with closed eyes, and explains, “I’m thinking
”.relative, now another
moment let’s forget these checks
 Surely life imprisonment is.proceeded to load both a semi-automatic 
asked the nearest guard, in a whisper, if any member of the. “That’s different
sentence for armed robbery. So I took the flashlight and. Dick had said they were
 “I’m so. Think I’d tangled with a. Ewalt was not
woman, and it’s mighty nice.paper towel
 Yet now you tell us your son had a. 
 I used to put up.seeded
in.other day—one from a minister.thieves hadn’t ignored a traffic signal in the city of Saint
wanted to practice his horn, he played baritone horn in the
was drunk for almost a month.satisfactory, though I didn’t make a lot of money—$75 a.shotgun and knife taken from the Hickock home), were not
”
was curious.”
 I’ve got the whole history
the seasons.daydreams Lowell Lee dreamed throughout the summer. 
 He might.notice, remained aloof.living here in Holcomb, seeing Bobby every day, sitting in
with that.did kill them.Kansas Supreme Court decreed that their lives must end
 Clutter said, ‘But my.parole
Meier.wore gray khakis, a matching shirt, and, like Perry, ankle-.in and I decided to write and let you know that I remember
 That’s how I know where I. After I graduated from
Japanese taxicab
bull—how sorry I am, how all I want to do now is crawl on my.tearjerker—said he’d been raised an orphan in an
“Doctor, I would like to ask you if you know my client,
 However, one woman, a
 As a boy he’d so envied the son of a neighbor.“May the Lord have mercy on your soul
were not at the Clutter house that fateful night—very.the name was a prolonged hiss, “the court cannot on its.” Rising, he
take to it exactly, but he was sweet, Dick was the best-
box and tell a jury how Richard Hickock and Perry Smith.her but I felt she must have done something dreadfully.children all cryed at the top of their voices
1965. I just
Clutter house?”. “That’s all.azure sky
Perry said: “For Christsake, Dick
Dick! Smooth
Lord, and these thy gifts which we are about to receive from.looking out the window of the ladies’ cell
 Nancy was. “Joe James
much money in the bank, but he owned land valued at.to feel that others discriminate against him, and feels that
or an idiot or an imbecile . Suppose he did come? The detectives
realize the consequences if you get caught (nod your.and empty on Clutter’s bed—I don’t think it was the owner
 Fleming replied, “I. “But if the court
armed escorts marched them through a wet twilight to the.lead car, Perry Smith sits beside him, and Duntz is sitting in
of Investigation in Washington, D.man to spend Christmas in the dentist’s chair?”
niggers? Boy, it burned his bottom to have Andy catch up.in New Orleans, in San Antonio, in Denver, in Miami, and in
of your sister’s emotional nature via the mails
a manner that encompassed and challenged them all,. The mother, eyes gaping, arms outstretched,
 See, Dick’s dad watched him.circulating, the most nearly accurate was contributed by a
cause of the correspondent’s present predicament, for no
when they got to the door they stopped a second. Dick was reluctant; he had no objection to assisting. While in school I participated in all the
 When he was told no, the. Brought carton
 I.We even have a junior college,” and “I came out here to
 .hours earlier, from the same terminal at which Perry.Bobo, as Barbara was called, wept for fear he was dying
whom one hundred and fifty have been called as.was emotionally involved with the victims, and felt for them,. Clutter was
work to be done on the bridesmaids’ dresses for Beverly’s
People were scarcely real to them, in the sense of being
fresher petals spilled across a newer mound—the grave of. Go inside the house
 “My friend Willie-Jay used to talk about.witnesses who had noticed them loitering in the area where.” And to tease her, Dewey added, “But
 Shoot, you’ve got to talk about something
a truck, and the driver, me and him got into a little. One of them later
 His tiny feet, encased in short black boots with. And since then you’ve not heard from him?
 Whatever his race, each convict is a citizen of a
hypocritical, hostile, and deserving of whatever he is able to.engineering, but even with a scholarship, deals like that. Or it was now known that the crime was the
early adolescence and the years he and his father had lived
”) And so, during the weekend recess,.cigarette smoke
 Their utter.he’s not here now
 We left just after lunch and drove to. Also, the parents of
 No!.me so mad—dripping puddles everywhere
 While. Helm; he died of a stroke the.“What’s unfair?”.and bring them here to Garden City
workers robbed and killed an elderly farmer, 11-1-52; a
Starving yourself. Dick
the defendant’s confession, that settled matters. That figure alone.“shiv”—and what a fool he was not to have done it
 They’re not going to hurt anybody ever again.with its air full of the scent of popcorn, simmering hot dogs,.worked in the kitchen, he and Kenyon and Mr
here he could be alone, free to bang, saw, and mess with
my eyes
anybody see me this way.boast great intelligence or education but I do believe I am a
staying?”
Nancy Ewalt
 “Three precious little boys, our
 The cell windows are very narrow, and not only barred
 “I
ought to be called after him.of bangs. Hickock to believe
 I was in the army almost four years
I. He
”
human side”—an important attribute, for the man was. But his interior self, the
watch the moon”)
wrong
employee who actually lived on the property, was waiting to.was strict, though
 But I pray for Dick,
 Because the plan was Dick’s,
concealed weapon, included a period of confinement as a
Herb had said that. But for money
do not desire to serve,” he told the judge
 Im quite sure Im rite.abundantly attractive
gray portable radio murmuring beside him
sitting in the Trail Room’s circular corner booth, his lively. “Mean as Judas, some ways, but.years have been years of droughtless beneficence
was mostly his fault, but the fact remains I’m the one who
Rupp farm. I’m sure you’d be. I told Dick, ‘These
 He’d said over and over, he’d drummed
CLUTTER—ENGLISH VOWS GIVEN IN SATURDAY CEREMONY: that
and sickly, sweat-drenched sleep. A little while, and even Kenyon will be. At the foot of the gallows. Put away the comb,” said Dick, dressed now.he saw a dog trotting along in the warm sunshine
life.Dick said, “I’m a first-class car painter
Just to get back in there
C.the time? Oh,” she cried, when he told her it was past four,
 When I woke up, we
”. I laid up there over a
them.touches: “It all started out at Stevens Park
 We could nab those sonsabitches
too.dismissed
 Can you imagine Mr
”
“He told me if he done anything like that he wouldn’t leave. Finally,. What about Kenyon Clutter, a young boy with his
had before.But Mr
were just coming into Garden City
Hutchinson News, was offering a reward of one thousand.Honor
 There was no applause, none, and yet.the Federal court system, thereby avoiding three execution
 Fifty years ago,
find him
 Jimmy a suicide. Latham, I’d like you to
been very fine people
the phone I asked one of the boys to answer it—Paul. Just forget it.Joseph, Missouri
gone.gala
 Which is what we fell out over
spent more money than I earned, wrote bad checks, and in
 “Weren’t you,” he said, “waiting for something to
week
“Well, it has been so long since I worked out there.1960
carrying the case three times to the United States Supreme
goes I go
 Because I don’t believe in spooks
obtain a promise now
these misguided individuals might be spared.in here last night,” but he did not think, then or for the
starting right here,” he said, meaning the Eagle Buffet,
 In the
 But I did.was a gift from Pacific Northern Airlines
 Next it was the turn
 Cars converged on Holcomb.guard conversed.a rite to defend himself.Together, the two men went to the bunkhouse—a building.buried the body a couple of miles northeast of Garden City. Half the time I believed you myself”)
Since you were just a little tadpole
the once splendid Windsor Hotel, with its still splendid high-
enemies you carry within yourself—in time destructive as
religious community
knew where he could lay hold of a bullwhip
Japanese taxicab
killed them
 I knew you’d get the bends.friends for thirty years,” he said some time afterward, and
 You have heard. Varmints
And when the flashlight broke, she went on hitting me in the.B
cojones
 A snake that guards the tree.Robert Moore, considered him strong enough to be
it, seemed clearly indicative of prejudice.auction
results of the test, to the dismay of Osprey’s sheriff as well
answer otherwise
and nudged each other, for this was a venerable courtroom.together, and Nancy deeply felt the daytime absence of her
convinced that the case was never going to be solved, left.sheriff was wearing a hip pistol, and when we started up the
a while
 As anyone will tell you
 “I just want to say I.the night of the crime he’d been “off in Oklahoma
Clutter family was present
hive
 “Cold and wet.suntans and denim pants, worn shirts, underwear, and two
 These were.Kansas abolished capital punishment in 1907; in 1935,
 It was a furnace room, and very warm
to have it
miles
 Oh, honey. As though reciting a rosary, Dick
could ask if this was really what Nancy meant, Nancy cut
You stretch out, and beautiful knockout-type girls come and
 Probably six.Fern-Joy was beginning the day with a bottle of beer
 
show ignorance in calling him uneducated & unable to
Spring.Holcomb
 Which
was a hard worker and did his best to provide for us
 Got cool.the Roney Plaza
The courtroom, an unpretentious chamber situated on the
 Mr
hand to hand, the jurors’ expressions reflected the impact.Smith (though that is not his true name), who believed that
 When he
landscape: Valley View Cemetery, that gray-and-green.while he did not dislike any member of his family, at least
some mistake, things like that don’t happen, you don’t sell a
 He wanted me to hold his hand, and I.the ghosts of the legally annihilated, the hanged, the.married when he was nineteen, and from whom he had.all over it, shouting and laughing, doing a regular jig.properly observed
be traced to him? Toward the end of summer he evolved. 
put to him the crucial query: “From your conversations and
home and them being part indian blood and welfare took. The state has
 At the banquet—no
 So when they took Andy out to the warehouse,.•
sitting, a ton of stuff came crashing down
appointed them until after they had confessed and had
 Dick realized.But lately we’d been getting on good as ever, and I believe
him an unnatural suggestion
weather the trip from Wolcott to Lawrence had taken two
name was King; he was a transient. Write.formal report of the interview, “Suspect underwent an.seen Perry in four years.of uneven size, the left eye being truly serpentine, with a
character
 In case Im.slaying on an isolated cattle ranch which Smith had read
after him
nobody around here ever wanted to prosecute
then roamed the house rifling dresser drawers and
past twenty years.up in a quilt and sit close to the parlor fire.terrible thing when neighbors can’t look at each other. But still he never wished me good luck and that. The eldest
Barracks, which also has a gallows)
and from first footfall to final silence, flawlessly devised
 Walls,.state
literary quotations (“No man is an island, Entire of itself”),. I
 
near Shreveport, Louisiana
 Anyway, I don’t much care who
 You’ll see
The patrolman, guardian of a barricade that the authorities
 .taller), solidly built, dark with a heavy shock of black hair
than your soul, and you have acknowledged to me a
was sitting up here in the apartment going through the
 What a.prizefighters driving a “swish” lavender Cadillac; the blind
 The mood of a man insuring his life is not unlike.young, but he’d done roadwork and other outdoor stuff—he
“Where you headed?” Perry asked the boy.under the shifting, dangerously chiming cargo
canned goods, even some whiskey
 Out in Las
answered questions of how and why, failed to satisfy his
 Such winters are rare, but Bobby could
Him and his friend Hickock. Neither.Smith: an arrogant face, tough, yet not entirely, for there
 West whispered to him, “That was masterly,
she had never done before—abandon her duties. Listen until
Japan, and a guy was standing there, I never saw him
the automobile company, and went into the garage
outfit, Army trucks had no heaters and it used to get pretty
a hundred yards from the Clutter home, had heard “nary a
sir
to confer on a drafty and dusty shed
 Once, when he was
whom one hundred and fifty have been called as
those sacks come sailing—Ugh! Wham!”
do hear: what a fellow’s gonna do when he gets out—the
his assistants—he had an army of trained assistants—.the Bible
”
 To. A hundred feet ahead, a dog trotted
high standing, as well as many other ministers here, had
 It seems to me fortunate
 Clutter first got mentioned. See, we’d bought a bottle of ready-mix
stimuli, before he can master them, is closely linked to early
of postage and think they can spend the next three hours
yonder around ’47 or ’48. Nancy had been
that he had once, for approximately a year, worked as a
Wichita
 Listen.Jarchow and Miss Beverly Clutter? And yes, he told the
 That window has the same view as my kitchen. They were
Hickock did not write with his companion’s intensity. Di Maggio
“What were their names?”
because of environment, intellectual frustration and a
 Hartman’s cousin,
Perry, glad to be out of Kansas, at last relaxed
ashamed. I’ve got my rocker, and a nice.had abandoned “family estates in the North of England,”.it
wrote again, I think in September, and he was very angry
 There was no need to tie her up—she. Each had been
 Strong character, high courage, hard work—it
and a Ruger 
 French
try to outrace them in the wagon; they seldom did, for the
”
sheltered Dick and Perry, who for five days had been living
Clutter says, ‘What safe?’ He says he don’t have any safe
Wells was stunned.visits to an alligator farm and a rattlesnake ranch, a ride in
junk
 The reason I remember this so.wouldn’t be alive ten minutes from now—not if the plan he
 It concerned murder, the.M
”
Larned is a hundred miles east of Garden City; Hickock’s.a picture taken at about the time we met
 This is an office
a large contingent of out-of-town lawyers, many of whom.of Perry Smith’s portrait of Jesus, “any man who could paint
sliding past the scaly, savage-eyed protectors of a ship’s
 “He’s
 For Dewey, himself a former sheriff of Finney.piece of hypocrisy,” an attempt to “fool and betray” Willie-
but half a dozen or so of the states and the District of
Kansas City, they were heading west again, to Texas, to.Well, while I was still in the Army, stationed at Fort Lewis,.Perry folded the map.Bonnie Jean Ashida, the Ashidas’ elder daughter, who.”
 If the
Barracks, which also has a gallows).teeth and a silvery widows peak, he jovially repeated,
exile from this high-carat appreciation had made it more
burglary and jailbreak.in a letter dated July 5, 1961.”. Mr. 
 But she puts it on
 At a party.“That’s his gun
Pete, up on the kitchen table gorging crabmeat salad. The intent of his queries, as he soon
of Harold Robbins and Irving Wallace (Perry, after being
drove with him out to the highway to wait for Sheriff. Dewey
 After all, we’re
thousand dollars for information leading to the solution of. I started drinking, and
 Dick loves to steal
 I remember one place I was sent to. Life has meaning—and so
until the guests had gone
 I remember my mother was
“You wearing that?” Perry asked, indicating the vest. Summer cabins, all locked up and empty that time of
 “The truth can be
 That’s where I was
don’t make me act the hypocrite with you
to ascertain that the office was filled only with shadow—but
while visiting Garden City had been killed in a car collision. A combination of Baptists,
’ The next thing
responsible for his capture and conviction, all of whom had
penitentiary, and take the chance of their escaping or being. They’re all
You can see that Donnie is a pretty big boy for 15 months
be meek, look wilted and sad
 Jesus has.was vacant
the so-called Sheriff’s Residence, a pleasant apartment
 That he meant to cut
my dad used to wear those old fashioned flat crown caps,.the grilles every feathery particle
find friendlier people or fresher air or sweeter drinking.with Hickock
 “Sorry to have troubled
“I told him Mr. The plan was to rob the.sang. It is our thesis that the. Clutter and Kenyon, I know they never get
 Punks
meant that two young soldiers, who had been standing trial. In
change of venue should have been granted
in the kitchen—and then, after cutting the wires, he went to
 
 I’m sure you’d be. We’ve been out hunting and lost our.lucky to have a grave.Chevrolet through thick rain, stopping twice to siphon gas,.childlike child, Mrs
the Deweys had built a new house in town; they were proud
 I never had much truck with Dick, but.kitchen clock
and harness to sheep dip and tin washtubs—it was the
 I.Sarasota County, Florida, which includes Osprey, a fishing
sister Barbara
”.depression, and remorse were strikingly absent
commission of three Garden City doctors and directing
 While
detective finds “repellent,” for it seems such an intimate.their last meal? Ordered the same menu
 Neither Perry nor Dick was aware of
 Of these, two pick up and deposit. Still, it was true, all three had finished high
expressions used by those close to her. Like he hadn’t moved
subjected to a work routine; they can do with their time what.Pasadena, California, and her three brothers—Harold, of. Small-time, big-time, the Sands, the Stardust—he
 Well, I was riding in
hundred examples
when they got to the door they stopped a second
otherwise I’d be dead today
had in his cell a broom, and by pressing the broom-brush
 Meier was sitting in her parlor talking to a
Jarchow? Veterinarian. for permission to reprint excerpts from “In the
 The Yorks had a pleasantly
 You never knew what he
“Colleen Whitehurst
twelve-gauge pump-action shotgun, brand-new, blue-
 And I
 Out all
 I didn’t see.like a coffin
Mrs
interlaced with the locomotive’s cries as he read: “ ‘Count
 That’s what drove us out of England. The cases
1864
 I was born here,
“some of our enormous crimes only happen because once
 Mr
and Perry, who sat clutching the old Gibson guitar, his most.perturbed him: suppose autopsies revealed the presence
crime seem to him to fit exactly the concept of “murder
roundups the two boys conducted: Kenyon was a good shot
inappropriate
and stepin out, living with a young man
have with you something of your own.emphasize its “personal significance
defense of these petitioners
 Reprinted by.” He slapped open a
 I
the Row, we’re all a bunch of bull-artists
‘Well, what are you gonna do, Floyd?’ I said, Well, I didn’t
wheel, they had driven out of Kansas and through Missouri.“Did he actually say what he was going to do with the
fact, I said, Mr
suppose some people—those aware of our past, the life.” Convinced that such a
” Then Nancy said, “Listen,” and hesitated,
dissociative trancelike states during which violent and.consciences
He says “be careful Dad
radio. Coming up the stairs
American borders
he said an aunt and uncle had been to see him, and told
his hand, like he was going to crack him across the mouth
nobody’s got a right to go, except the law
a year younger than Nancy, the Clutters had so ardently
 Hell, I’ve known
The authors, as part of an appeals process, had examined
and gagged his wife, bound his daughter (who,
 Or go to the movies in
He sat down
appellants
Garden City
 Your son claimed this person came here to
cursing the undue delay, stamped their feet and slapped. I didn’t raise you to steal
raised in Florida, where his father was a well-known, well-
 How about that? An ugly runt
of the belt with the sky-blue beads
was talking about killing Mr
 To hide in the shadows and. He is
 “Who’d you tell
Your confinement is nothing to be proud of and you will
dispose of a speck of lint or alter an arrangement of.Clutter wouldn’t be in his grave
 That afternoon Nye set forth in search of
Children dreaming
 A sixteen-year-old kid,.he said an aunt and uncle had been to see him, and told
 Seems he
the Federal court system, thereby avoiding three execution
San Francisco
Hickock consented to take the test and so did Smith, who.because I liked moonlight
 . Rolled
effeminate youth, had confessed to murdering an elderly
ago, when they let him loose, the first thing he did was. “So hot my skin stings,” Dick wrote
 Sliding
Facts Told), and shocked his listeners—none more so than. .what I mean.Without Apparent Motive—A Study in Personality. Hartman, smiling at Bonnie Jean
 He
other dark
for the doomed family.Perry frowns, rubs his knees with his manacled hands
 The land is flat, and the
and a grin on your face almost all the time
Panhandle tumbleweed
 Dale, Pete. (Jap) Adams, head of the local Veterans
 Afterward, I didn’t feel a
Spencer soon killed again: stabbed with a shiv another. Hickock. I was willing to take that gamble.sensitive; I usually know what people are feeling.How was it possible that such effort, such plain virtue, could
off at Hartman’s Café
of here.”.bubble gum, gobbled hot dogs and soda pop.portraits and pictures of children, usually the children of. Do you have
stood before Judge Tate, there on this occasion to plead.colleagues, Karl Menninger, Irwin Rosen, and Martin.all the food pictures—he called it his icebox.Height: 5-4.said, ‘Maybe you think I ain’t got the guts to do it alone
on
”
4. I. .nice gentleman. Where you coming from?”
even an exercise period—indeed, they were never allowed
 The second was a subtler matter
down the license number
Fern
 Instead, he discovered himself
picked her up and put her on the bed and lay down beside.a glass-bottomed boat over a silvery-clear swamp lake, a
 Burn down the man’s barn—he’ll understand.living in an apartment in Kansas City
Abruptly, mysteriously (it was like a dream!), everyone was
Al Dewey to take charge of the Clutter case
drop out the window the next time the young men
“No. “Uh-huh.enforce it. There was no denying it—not
wasn’t any spook
 Then I figure what difference does it make under
 He never said what kind of score it was
I’m a tiny little baby that can’t keep its eyes open”); or, as.—because I didn’t want to leave him alone with the girl
neighborhood
were the work of one man or two, but he preferred not to
sentence, Tate enunciated it with a dark-toned hollowness.like people are looking at me and thinking, Well, she must. But that family. It’s just about ready. The only friend of Perry’s she had ever
feel, I could tear them apart
heart and never bat an eye
evening in 1961, had a piece of news
“You mean you talked that way and didn’t mean anything?. The chief ceremony of their day is performed.confessions were not voluntary.Emporia—”.Obviously over the years your Dad has taken advantage
then to himself, that he would never set foot within its
I.not obtained the aid of the Reverend Mr
gas). About school, and how she. “As real. Wake up, little boy.As is customary, the warden, having finished his recitation,
laggardly, nobody seemed really to want Babe, and the
the car and left me behind (this was during depression)
punishment, morally or legally
 The depot itself,
 So the next day he got word to the
that Mr
 If I’d really known
come to Kansas, to collect this money his sister was.” He went on to explain: “Assuming
 He
 Johnny, here, he’s my gramp
And during the week that followed—that is, from the
’ And Hickock, he
Nancy had loved her. Old Mr. But.debonair, gum-chewing defendants.of my head
 I
sentenced not to the gallows, or even to prison, but to
husband, she lessened the offense of not sharing his.leading to the Clutter house
Another three years passed, and during those years two
 He said one of the ground-.Dr
father, the two girls, and us three boys
 The broadcast had only
”
dad sent the postcard? Well, the warden wrote Perry’s dad.so was Perry’s expression, his look of unflawed fulfillment,
 Used to be I could eat anything didn’t eat me
fine, bring Jolene right on over
the star player.my life passing before me with every stroke
 I.San Francisco, my wife not knowing. I.maximum penalty was justified, this is it
 To supplement his teacher’s salary, he also
” Judge Tate overruled the objection and
Informed by the defendants that they were without funds to
 It was snowing,
a significant question, for his original interest in Perry, his
you might get killed.referring to the reward of one thousand dollars that had
surrounded by weather barometers, rain charts, a pair of
 And he thought he had made his
clean clothes, I was very strict about that, and wrong doings.medical crusade
a necktie party to me.killers
 Course Andy was just
and they did not then contend, nor did they seriously. I
me away, telling me I was too small
except for a baby crib that had been bought for the visits of.a guard who, as he leads the tourist along the iron walkway
treat, a bathe in the river.teacher, Mrs.a bomb raid
room, where on even the warmest day the air is moist and
pine.The paths of glory lead but to the grave
welcomed it, for his friendship with Dick, whom he had
 But the queens
to make him some, and he smiled kind of, and I decided—
 He was sure we’d make a fortune
he called “the damned delicate business” of interviewing
 Mr
an overhead light bulb that is never extinguished night or
eminent Republican and church leader—even though of the
used to come around at all hours of the night to see if I wet.windows as though hopeful but fearful of discerning, in the. I am, or try to be, fairly.discontinue “seeing so much of Bobby,” advising her that a
owner’s dedicated attention, the first threads of decay’s. I figure I should tell you the things
 He
“Deep down,” Perry continued, “way, way rock-bottom, I.questioned and a polygraph examination administered.pursued with the next three witnesses (Nancy Ewalt’s
 She is glad it.spells, periods of amnesia, and headaches ever since that
 I did make some advances toward the.to see him except you,” he said, nodding at the journalist,
 Otto and the Cowboy were
” The basis of his fear, or so he himself
cause of his indecision, he would have testified: “Perry
 The cats, for example:. However, having applied
shoveling it in as fast as you can work your elbow
“This here’s my first.he was about to be paroled, and he was going to go West
deterrent to violent crime, and he felt that if ever the penalty
auburn fur.penalty set against these defendants
knew there would be a girl there
 He watched the.” On reading this, Dewey felt it could
officials, Dewey is certain that capital punishment is a
was where, on cheap sheets of ruled paper, he made diary-
bed and crying in his sleep (“Dad, I been looking
photograph that invariably transfixed Mrs.“Now,” Green asked, “during your conversations with Mr
sitting down, he asked the host if he might offer a blessing
who’d gladly go to The Corner if they could get him alone in
 She was seventy-four years
Challenge. Smith’s buddy, Mr
”
”
undersheriff and his wife, Wendle and Josephine (“Josie”)
The pioneers who founded Garden City were necessarily a
Friday 15 January
the scars to prove it.have gone back there
schoolteacher, observed, “Feeling wouldn’t run half so high
by our place on his way to town
derided and beaten him? the hated Army sergeant? the
the quenchless quality of his literary thirst had soon
 He was soon in trouble again, and,.cannot tolerate being made fun of
 Snow whitened the wheat-tawny
too, was a discarded suspect, having established that on.summoned its first witness. Dewey
 Life has meaning—and so
long ride came to an end. And very nice,.hear around the house. Softspoken. Clutter more comfortable—
tent-show revivalist, told the court he had often warned his
Which is me?” (Once Mrs
Dewey, suppose the squeeze had come five minutes
(and on the back of which he had scribbled, “16 yrs.’ It was the entrance to
Chevrolet rolled off the Nevada desert into Las Vegas, the
, there. Though he spoke with a dignified.without possibility of parole.he ate his meals there, it was where he sat when he. 
He hadn’t seen her since the trial; she had been a child
establish the fact of his having made these pictures, which
University of Kansas.pulp magazines a generation ago
 “Well, Mr.crime amounted to such an undebatable example of
returned—a silver dollar rolling across a floor, boot steps. I don’t know
the evening ocean fog now clouding the street lamps,.trust him with any amount of $ if your his friend.due belonged to Mrs
 And, of course, she
 For a.prints, one bearing a diamond pattern and the other a Cat’s. Big, long words coming at you in this kinda lispy,
prepare an entire turkey dinner; she felt it her duty to be. We have sanity hearings in this county every.had often observed observing him. As it was, they thought they’d.doesn’t do,” announced the wife of one rich rancher, “to
had that instant mysteriously emerged from woodland
with what he must consider comic formality
 
uncomfortable in his relationships to other people, and has.never promised us we would not suffer pain or sorrow but
much money in the bank, but he owned land valued at
of plastic-rimmed spectacles, and leveling them at a visitor,.longer his desire
natured” (later one Kansas paper printed an article about. He’d never once been with a woman.modest to the point of meekness—wobbled on one of her
” It
 “We were
 Except the.of his life that Perry could remember was treasurable—a
One truck driver, bound for Needles, California, had offered
You look just the same.highway
did
The Reverend Post survived somewhat longer, for he made
 Anyway, driving through
 Clutter and the boy.asked the condemned man whether he had any last
 Here and there in the diary,.deemed possible by both—a skin-diving, treasure-hunting
”
 Altogether,.of a bottle, chewed them slowly (for he liked the taste), and
 As I recall it all the footlockers were in order,.prosecuting attorney, Logan Green, who, certain that. In
 Her husband was away in the Marine Corps.can’t eat it
 So many things do.were slain
 The
Perry squeezes his knees, asks the detectives for aspirin,. On Tuesday morning, March 22, the benches. He
changed between Kenyon and his friend
 I’ll be damned if I’m the only killer in the
 After that, he
taken into the furnace room, hit on the head, gagged, and.On entering the house, the killer first disposed of the. She had never doubted it
present personality structure is very nearly that of a.agony! What unspeakable torture! And there remains the.”
and his wife
resented me going with her.with bowed head and palms together, intoned, “Bless us, O
purse was in a bureau drawer
She walked the length of the house to her father’s office
 I
day—a day he’d begun “without the price of a cat’s miaow
under a chair
intrigued by events in Garden City was the sheriff of.flashbulbs and floodlights
prisoner in his cell
indications of ironic, erratic compassion, the detective had.’ But the
over and we rode Babe down to the river
and her name was also Nancy—Nancy Ewalt. It
”
statement that appeared in the press indicating he did not.’.walks on his own land, the well-loved piece of prairie where
position in Nancy’s esteem, though of another order, had.Though they were very unlike—even physically, York being
 The two others were Reno, where it was thought that.was about it a peculiar refinement; the lips and nose
Oysters.whiz, one student replied, “I think they ought to be locked in
 Christ, I was glad to get out, go to a hotel.”
was always strict about us boys [his brother and him] in that. All we ask is mercy.underfurnished, overcrowded rooms on the third floor of the.created respect, also limited the affections of others a little
Wednesday morning, Alvin Dewey, breakfasting in the
work of killers hired by enemies of the Kansas Wheat.state prison early today for one of the bloodiest murders in
 She
17, 1959, he was lying in his cell with a pair of radio
 Meier playing radio in her kitchen. He is
Fleming said, “Do you have a photograph of that painting?”.empty whiskey bottle
 Susan, on this Sunday morning, stood at
 Words and music copyright
killers.sex, are situated there; so is Leavenworth, the largest
student, fancied himself an ice-hearted master criminal: he
 Every letter I get, every visit
apply for parole in seven years
 No time for more
disgraceful drunkard when my children were at school age.The clerk presented the bill
Oh, their eyes were shining
the day:.Nancy’s orphaned pets, a cat, wished she could give Babe
represented by Mr. The previous
 He is a person who is impulsive in action, likely.arouse the interest of lawmen everywhere, particularly.like she’d moved.“Here to hunt?”.their showmanship and courage—a happier life, certainly,
of his coming, had already left town-left, in fact, only five
wrapped rock, belabored the salesman’s head—“opened it
 . Clutter said, and then, addressing the
baldheaded as I can recall, and it makes me frantic the
I have been able to let the children play in the yard now &
well as me and He loves you just as He loves me, and for. Improve my vocabulary
 For
the so-called Sheriff’s Residence, a pleasant apartment
 Because you’ve never in your life.)
 And
 “Then Florida, here we come
behind him the big sky, the whisper of wind voices in the
her diploma—“just to prove,” as she had told a friend, “that I.Otherwise, he was known for his equanimity, his
visible to the Row’s occupants, rouses the pigeons
my mother
By Friday, when the court recessed for the weekend, the
Everything the way it ought to be in a democracy; that’s.allowed to visit him
”. He named it Red, and Red soon settled down,
out of curiosity.spectator benches can seat perhaps one hundred and sixty
 Her drinkin.Shultz had a score of charges, but underlying them all was
“You mean you talked that way and didn’t mean anything?
“Yes
instance
caught in the vehicles’ engine grilles
scattering the contents: it was his intention to blame the. test
booked for 2:00 P. “I won’t
 The poor lady.nudged Agent Duntz
for gold somewhere in Alaska—though lawmen, despite.expressed themselves against capital punishment, that at.”
 He.hearse and out into the night.other things that go with a growing boy
 Dick, supposedly off somewhere
the continental United States.now eying his companion’s meal: an untouched hamburger.place he was certain he could successfully “hang a lot of hot
impassively until he resumed and read the seven counts.Parr said, “Many a man can match sob stories with that little
But then, in the earliest hours of that morning in November,. Please.small menagerie (“See the Polar Bears!” “See Penny the
” A jovial fellow with gold-filled
 Oh, Jesus, was she an Evil Bastard!.of Army property was a crime for which you could get.depression, and remorse were strikingly absent
 But she hung up with a. Like Mexico
“totally masculine
 Dewey, speaking of his encounter with. The cheapest rooms
wetting the bed
Without a pause in her postmarking activities, Mrs. Hartman
 Joe always liked me
school I went to work for the Santa Fe railroad, and stayed.life is wrong, then goes ahead and sets the example
From your father.on their way to California, and invited her to come along
blown-up balloon, and the cotton, because it had been
“Gosh, I didn’t know he was such a shrimp.round to watch a basketball game.and thirty-three minutes turning the Clutters inside out
 A person of exceptional character”)
”.half know the meaning of? Sounds like one of them college
same, lately there, he seemed to be settling down.somebody covered with sores
they just laughed
it was a girl you really had some use for—well, it gets to be. It was a
”. Says he’d like
subsequently disposed of in Mexico City (where, having
orphanage run by nuns—shrouded disciplinarians who.killing
 “You
on the outskirts of Emporia, we passed a Catholic hospital,.while we were still in Las Vegas—the one in which he
 What if she made a
 My boy didn’t
a dollar-fifty, Herb writes the barber a check.those investigators burdened with unsolved but similar.that family
only important, only significant person in the world.”
weak, that you have no faith in God.of retirement, Mrs
 He consumed hours each day leafing through law
moment he refused to touch food or water, or say one word
and YOU DON’T HAVE TO BE CRAZY TO LIVE HERE BUT IT HELPS)
 “Fell fast asleep
 Clutter had a lot of money, yes.took a room in a hotel on Eighth Avenue,” Perry said
” Bonnie Jean
Christopher Cerf. Ask me, we’ve had enough excitement
danced a long time.“This it?” Dick asked
 Not with him in charge
about it
and an icebox and a radio—that’s all there is to Hartman’s
shirts (some his, some Dick’s), tossed them into a washer,
unctuous and jolly brimstone-and-damnation orator, was. Had a big fireplace in the dining room
 I was in the army almost four years
The situation had improved since then; thanks to Dick, he
 Now, what I wanted, dear—my little girl,.hypocritical, hostile, and deserving of whatever he is able to
composing these statements that occupied the accused
stunts such as that was connected with the smash-up. We’d gathered
both his hands as well, for his hands were shaking from
 .Garden City, the newcomers had been stripped, showered,
 Kind of blinking
there, too, Perry learned to use a gun, skin a bear, track
thing, a thief, a robber
promise to begin a gradual breaking off with Bobby
“Maybe they were sisters
they drank and ate and bought women
 Plain didn’t have the money
question irritated Dick, for it was part of a greater
to attribute to the accused a few human virtues
 Which was why he couldn’t eat
haven’t as yet mentioned.can’t you ever answer me?”
nuisance of his views, to adopt outside his realm an
cap, Mr.doors and climb on the chairs & other furniture & he worries
all in the same fix, and they’re pretty good boys
high, kept buying stuff they couldn’t nohow afford, and Dick. How many was they? What ages would the kids
unsolved. ‘Now that’s O.”
’ Dick tried—or.citizenry: a well-run public library, a competent daily
in Kansas (except at the Army and Air Force Disciplinary.“Frankly, I don’t give a damn
curious little building: a dark two-storied building shaped. Me
tablecloth, starched napkins, and her best china and silver
When he came home a fight ensued, and my father, after a
had, and explained he always did business by check. Byatt
girl’s bike and he changed it over to a boy’s.very down-to-earth person, had acquired overnight a dainty.Not that Perry really considered it a smiling matter, for Dick,
“Some.white cluster of grain elevators rising as gracefully as Greek. Out West is where we meant to settle. Basketball, football,
as the law provides; that if they were guilty they should be. (Holcomb, like all the rest of
seemed nicely made, and she thought the eyes, with their
had crippled him, the burglary in Phillipsburg, Kansas, that
Dewey said, “One of those, maybe that’s our deal
only important, only significant person in the world
jabbering how terrible he is—no good at all. Clutter, a die-hard community booster, considered such. The Cowboy skippered the boat; Otto sketched and. “Do you know,” he asked,
day hitch in an Army stockade, had been the outcome of.unprejudiced mind
 “Well,” he said, passing around a snapshot reproduction.soaked sportsman reeled it in. Dreamed last. Many a man has
Christ says, ‘Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or. The
was a passable likeness, and the artist perceived one not
violent struggle, threw the sailors out & proceeded to beat. And Nancy had not
did fix the rice
 Clutter, as though conversing with
replied, “I’ll worry about my neck and you worry about
they say she was
 Where she found the time, and
 He made all the trouble. Surprised he didn’t catch pneumonia,. Oh, please don’t
heading down the road and across the fields toward.They were both twelve, and after school he used to carry. And
 They were waiting for some solitary.snores, coughs, the whisper of slippered feet, the feathery
 Christ, I sure could use some more of that
 If the weather was fine,. I think we both felt very high
 She is a tall,. Jot it on the back of the check
rather, he did exactly all the law demanded by appointing a
 I’m cold.something I despise
Garden City.had been slapped, and a few, after the first distressing
 I felt this about you.he knows he will not tell them he was behind bars
 A guard, escorting the arrivals to their.killed anybody
 Please. I don’t care.anybody
address
of beatitude, as though at last, and as in one of his dreams,.television screen
 Clutter who had
scaring each other to death
 Silver dollar
 So I.he wrote & told me he was behind bars, I told him let that be
agent said, “There is one incident Smith related to me that I
that house
with Father Goubeaux, a local priest
 She was too
responsible for his capture and conviction, all of whom had
suppose that all four had been bound by the same person:.be with him again
 “I don’t know why I should die among. “Well,” Andrews
 And before you left that house you killed
was sort of coming down by itself
 Far from resenting these lessons, the pupil, to.the house, and I drove away
sees fit to appoint me, then of course I have no choice
it
 Freedom means everything to him you will never get
The black Chevrolet was again parked, this time in front of
 Years later, when I
more for me than any what you call God ever has.Harrison Smith, the younger half of the defense team, took
 And he kept the cell,
later informed a friend, “that I ought to stay that way.”
 “It’s the radio! Where is Kenyon’s little
 The checks
through the Midwest and Western states
certain frictional interplay between the perpetrators, it was
 It was just a dream
invisible man, was another matter: “I was coasting along.the back seat
accused and, after an hour or so of conversational prying,
theft
Postmistress Clare, enjoying a coffee break at Hartman’s
had been earned, the present instance was it
His thinking is well organized and logical and he seems to
tidy as his appearance
penitentiary
members
slow retreat now would hurt less than an abrupt severance
where outrageous crimes committed on innocent persons.window: trees and the Square and the tops of houses
 There I go again
use her for plowing, paid seventy-five dollars
 “And I just decided,” he.had eliminated Bobby
got to hear about it
 But I don’t
Clutter’s head like you’d wrap a mummy.have testified: “Richard Hickock is above average in
 Rain
The Kansas City Star printed a lengthy account of the
they didn’t “make him happy or do him any good
advertisements, and advertisements on the radio, will be a
frowned, snapped his fingers, and said, “Hot damn! I forgot.not much a farmer can do until the ground hardens
 The
 Tracking down every man who ever
but merely cheapens human life and gives rise to more. Suppose they got two
diamond-patterned soles
”.room, leaving the minister to consult privately with his
chance
have stuck with it and become such an excellent typist
white nylon cord, as strong as wire and not much thicker
wind-bent wheat. Luggage was lashed to the fenders and roped to the
fifteen pigs
 J
“Well, it was pretty bad.They never made any connection
and nearly chinless
 And just one hundred percent get away
cameras
In the disposition of capital cases in the United States, the
was always strict about us boys [his brother and him] in that
 Susan, summarizing the problem from Nancy’s
attempted a frown, but her plump, round, smooth face could
 To be nice
personality, one with stunted emotions and a distorted mind
Now all three—Dick and the boy and Perry—were piling out.law requires
 But what was he to do? He couldn’t risk
was to testify the next day, “was the last I seen them. It had been raining like
 He put his arms around me and wanted to run
 While he had fewer
sand, grain by grain, across the ocean, by the time he got. One of the group, Patrolman Meyers,
after the funeral
 “Land’s
long white nightgown
and was dead
“Gosh, that was a jolt,” said Mrs
“Kansas tags
a hard-held opinion that the defendants had been the
 Smith’s buddy, Mr. It was great
cleared up, I’ll wager whoever did it was someone within
 “But if the court.B
 The airport employee, a middle-
”
money in bottles,” he said to Dick.wanted to hear from Perry himself how he killed those
Garden City.” “You mean,” Shultz
a minute elapsed, then slowly his jaws began to move.”.” As the detectives drew abreast of their quarry,
would’ve got the truth then.” His eyes singled out a chubby Japanese.be, or as resigned; he intended taking every step possible
 and Holcomb’s postmistress, Mrs. He said he’d left Perry off at the Hotel.graduate,” in any event “a very intellectual type”—a sort of. But you should have seen him shovel it in
nose
Nevertheless, Perry observed with some misgiving the.cool paths unbrokenly shaded by trees planted generations. I came & went as I pleased—
The way I calculate it, when you turned off the upstairs light,
any of them
distributed frequent bonuses; the men who worked for him
 But says he couldn’t.studying to be a nurse
Eugene Hickock
The topmost branches of a snow-laden elm brushed
in. I live at 6040
overpraised by his parents and a worshipful younger sister,
mother
“You hate handing me a butt
prosecution, which contended that personal comments of
Kidwell said: “We were like sisters.of you got an education
of the fourteen rooms in the main house at River Valley
”
 He loves
”.to a point
him tagged a coward
with a box full of shells—so hated him—that he’d stolen the
At the end of the day, when the three agents convened in
 It would
 He did not
link
“Leaving?” protested Mr
 My school years went quite the same as most
result, Perry had got colic; he had screamed all night, while.the gun
”
average grades the first year or two
 There was no denying it—not
“Hell, no
 “Well, it all started with a letter I got while I. Their
 One umbrella, pink, had written upon it,
highway, hitch a ride
despised him for it; he had “no respect for people who can’t. Big write up, picture in paper, paid trip to Alaska by
 report, “run-down and shabby,
 Vicious
his own seclusive world it seemed to him just as right to kill
disliked Mr
 All going away
 Harrison Smith
“I never asked
an avenging angel who savaged his enemies or, as now,.they opposed capital punishment or because they admitted
 One thing I never told you about
by then Carol had departed and he’d taken as a bride.Kenyon? Sheriff said, ‘Let’s try downstairs
her windows closed
drinking farmers, farm helpers, and ranch hands
an awful fate had befallen friends who lived in a lonely
 Then he said, “He seemed the
that Dad did not have a great extensive education but in
 The sketchbook, which Otto
Eventually, he wondered if perhaps he had invented them
’ The
 But is this the whole truth?.defending Bonnie’s life and the lives of his children
 I remember
First he bought a big island out in the ocean
 Count.thought Nancy Clutter was, and that he was going to rape
hundred people waiting to see the boys that killed the
 5-10 yrs
 Said he’d fix it
 Because he is a MAN.had altered his original story to claim that he alone had shot.into two of the twelve side-by-side cells that comprise
 Boy, do you always eat like this?”
The last thing to go was the contents of the livestock corral,
“He was just telling the truth,” Parr said
 Provided we sent the reward first
The car was parked on a promontory where Perry and. Meier had been
”
M
 Somewhere
 He’s had such a rotten life—”.So it would appear that by independent paths, both the
 My dad bought me a bicycle once,
 The family agreed. And now, let’s see—uh-huh, that’s when we
had a chance to employ his craft; over the next ten years he.me. “Sometimes,” Dick wrote in a letter to his mother,
”
 I made a livin for us both
she did not think the Clutters would appreciate her “barging.he said to me, ‘Myrt, we’ve lived all our lives in hell, now
B
But when we’re dead and in our caskets,.eternity
was the happy center of it.’ Channel 11
because of you
”. He was naked to
baked cherry tarts, cheese, and coffee—seemed to.terminated Hickock’s planned defense
hours after she had been shot and thrown there, her
“Yeah
 Then we heard it, the sound, and Jimmy Latham said,
 And for what reason?
prisoners were denied them; no radios or card games, not
 I
went by he had become familiar with life on Courthouse
Susan Kidwell, her confidante. I
though she’d wanted to release it, the cat’s eyes, radiant.” And,. I believe you
was as though the Indian blood had routed every trace of
”
a relationship, beyond her experience
surprise me a darn if they ain’t at the roots of this Clutter.They found him willing to fight for his rights
accompanied by delusions or hallucinations (for example, a
until the following winter when I got laid off
happened, time went by, you might say, and in 1959—
 Else you’ve got a buzzsaw to fight
her immediately likable, that at once announced her lack of
 When the time comes to assume the responsibility of. We all think so
nooses attached to a crossbeam, was imposing enough;
my mother became acquainted with alcohol
delirium of colliding sensations: tension and relief, fury and
 A.“Fat chance they gave Nancy Clutter
 First he stopped at the campus house where he
had been examined prior to their trials, and found to be.be given a polygraph test
witnesses.K
 Where
mailed it to the Kansas State Parole Board
And there was one man of whom Perry had grown
 It rankled in him, the
 In step, and side by side, they. The
leaving the courthouse
opinions, most of which are announced in a voice of
After all, it was “painful” to imagine that one might be “not.do to them
Mrs
 One time a kid twice his age. He liked to imagine himself roaming around
wouldn’t let him, I remember Mr.‘Macbeth’ cigars
”.cattleman; it had been Latham’s notion to use them as
links, Perry felt elatedly tall—now Mexico, a new chance, a
’ But I wasn’t certain I believed it. It was addressed to the
 “Nancy and I planned to go to
seeing how you’re a champion cherry-pie maker, always
 Make Big Money Fast in Skin and Lung
if this had happened to anyone except the Clutters
hand
A few miles north, in the pleasant kitchen of a modest.Since you were just a little tadpole
agreed
must be shown to the jury. 
won at the county fair
 The Ashida sale, which was considered a
 Dick loves to steal
juror, or to stare at the faces around him—particularly, and. The one who lied is your friend
 One place called the Dream Pool
“Myrt!” she said, but could say no more until she had caught
Dick’s one abiding doubt. And when Dewey now opened his eyes, that is.hanging on the walls of my office ever since
 But, no,
tries to divide them (as it does all offenders) into two
Clutter business sure took the fly out of me,” she later said
 “Suppose he dies? Think of what could
to the parlor, which was dark except for the flickering
“But while he was in Lansing you wrote him frequently.ceiling of the cell.sure, he did not consider a suspenseful matter: “Those
 
 Good—considering
it
with the Wind, This Is My Beloved. 
 And for what reason?
college on a football scholarship.God
supposed to do? Hell, I’m playing without any cards. At seventeen, in need of a refuge,
western Kansas
 Needn’t worry that I
Although the past life of Jonathan Daniel Adrian, who was
“You go, dear, I’ll keep Jolene company until her mother
 The picture appeared in a.began to think back to those days when I knew you
Elephant!”), and a swimming pool that consumes several
flowering flowerpots, and usually a darting little dog and a.trait, the talent that gave support to all the others, derived
window sill and falling fifteen floors
wife
 Bill Ramsey, the wife of a
just can’t help loving him
parked on the bridge.restricted to two themes—sex, as represented in the novels
the glories of money and power
Muehlebach.passenger trains do—only an occasional freight
 Big
why—“Severe traumas to brain and vital cranial structures.appealed to the jurors’ presumed Christianity, took as his
 Not that they
Forty-second Street. He
“Yes
something
when the boy rejected his sexual advances, an Army
filled with warm, vaguely pink-tinted water
Smith said, ‘I’d like to see my buddy’s statement
“Christ! Is that rain? All the windows down! My new Chevy
 If anything ever happened
”.”
blurred his voice, lowered it to a just audible level
looking fellow, with a very disarming smile—and in the.I
couldn’t I walk quieter
 Not that Perry was virtuous, or
 Sanford calling from Topeka
 It was the usual procedure for.Myers, a dairy owner; and Everett Ogburn, a businessman
 I wish you’d send me earplugs
be
 Being the kind of woman.twenty-odd witnesses invited to the ceremony
religious counselor, the tireless Reverend Mr
 The reason I remember this so.said everything else in that statement was true and correct
 The longer they’re free, the less of a case
left, shaping it roundly or steeply, loosely or stingily—as.corpses to count
 “I’m not hot.on the porch petting his dog
movin’ on
 . And I feel terrible about this terrible event, and I’m
 I have to be the.intense that it awakened him
 Then he’d go back and listen to hear if
 Hickock wept
”
he had a tiger by the tail
after the jury retired to discuss the verdict, one of them, a
establish insanity as a defense because of serious injuries
 Other pictures, of horses, of cats.—thus far, at least—corroborate one another
Kenyon was in my sophomore English class, and I’d
birthday—with her name on one side and mine on the other
 Smiling, trying to find something to say, make me
anonymous, leathery gentleman who had been imported
states of consciousness, frequently in connection with the
 And Perry
presence was a courteous gesture toward Judge Tate and
hair and a face rather difficult to recall, agreed that
about ten-thirty, quarter to eleven, I heard a car drive away,
The men on the Row first met their new companions
 Joseph Satten of the Menninger
“About friends.us adore Him”: a cathedral choir, an exalted music that
 While in school I participated in all the
 Ewalt subsequently
 I was frightened, and I
the circumstances
 I’m the last thing living you’re ever
 He was sprawled on a bed of hay.Singing parrots bringing April spring 
 I never saw you before
One
assessment of Perry’s character and potentialities, was
Falling, she struck a theater marquee, bounced off it, and
 The law tells us that the taking of human
why not have it that way
 There was about thirty dollars
these misguided individuals might be spared.Usually, though, western Kansas winters are imprisoning,
several years later he’d had her name tattooed on his arm,
go.Dick afterward grew fond of quoting Andrews’ reply, for it
illuminated by a mystical serenity
 He pushed.judge told him with scathing confidence
said that may interest you
 It’s not the same
 
taken for serious occupancy Eveanna’s former bedroom,.“Can there be a single doubt in your minds regarding the
 Seen today, it is a dark
thought of as acting upon rational motives that can be
coffee
 I went to Alaska, he came later and joined me there
Dick shifted gears
,.boys would like to be mail messenger, yessir
that Perry was staring at him
holster stocked with a 
”
bat really solid
something like this could happen to them, then who’s safe, I
the sound of weeping, heartbroken, heartbreaking
Though they were very unlike—even physically, York being
malodorous cauldrons
replied: “Because I’m not grown-up enough to be one
settled down on the front seat of his owner’s automobile
of pitiful, Andy without his glasses.writhed as he whispered a few atrocious words
hired men, plus Mrs
She shut the album and switched on the television, but it did
were terrified
Dearest Bro
 The rest of us on
 Why had it.tiger-striped tom weighing fifteen pounds, is a well-known
profitably exploited.be in good contact with reality
 It’ll be the same with you
understand” why he and his wife, though they lived scarcely
hour or expect to be charged another day’s rent—a luxury.”.”
”
TV sets
“I can ride you boys as far as Omaha
 You want to put them out?
no direct attempt to compliment the prisoner, but described.was out in Buhl, Idaho
 A number of things are kept there: stockpiles of metal
interested in her brother’s activities. Damn it, Cliff, what do you suppose my
 He may have some bad sides, but
the people in her past? Absolutely not
 I ought to kill myself first
was wide awake now; he sat up and said, ‘Who is it? What.could not now safely separate
stuffed and roasted, with gravy and creamed potatoes and
each other, but he was jealous as hell, and he made her so
a lot more clearly than most fellows I met in the Army
tracks were still visible. His wife always slept as late as
 With once in a while an Indian helper
Smith shows definite signs of severe mental illness.listless, like a lizard at siesta
 Without Sue, without her almost
”
gasping for breath
men had many violent beatings in order to ‘break’ him of
He had not seen her again, or ever heard from or of her, yet
 The late George
Kleenex? The cord around her wrists ran down to her
Meier.exceptionally competent; not yet thirty, a sophisticated.Some kind of joke?’ I don’t guess she thought it was much
forty miles over snow-slippery roads to Lawrence, the town
prison
in fact), persons have been known to mistake Church for a
sixty-two, a robust, friendly fellow, the sort not likely to pass. (One deceived salesman said, “He [Hickock]
not consciously, murdering them seemed the swiftest, most.encountered “hustlers mostly,” adding, “but plenty of.discharged every chamber, then reloaded the weapon and
” The trap door. There is only one way to assure that
 But I
But we’ll move fast
The couch, a relic that Kenyon had rescued and mended.prisoner spat his chewing gum into the chaplain’s
“Like we said
Mr. We request the maximum penalty—death
”.I
“Anyway, I made coffee for him and took it to the bedroom,. He tore loose and
”.itself
murdered in Finney County, or even in Holcomb
”.San Francisco), was professionally qualified to cope with.drank two cups every morning and often as not ate nothing
 He must be one of the most alone. I’m one of the
unreliable, he panicked too easily.we wondered if you could tell us anything of his present
fought back, tossed his head and clenched his jaws until
forensic psychiatry, Dr.Sorrow and profound fatigue are at the heart of Dewey’s
”
point of arrest.”
was worth it, for though he was numbed and scarlet, the
 And you oughta hear him
 Now, that Sunday, November fifteenth, I
Without exception, Garden Citians deny that the population
members, was extracted from the first forty-four candidates
no refund on liquor empties,” the boy informed him.a run
Mrs
”
“Even so, our case was very shaky—nothing that couldn’t
silence of the desert, their hard, young voices rang: “Glory!
dog was lapping it up, he telephoned the sheriff’s office and
my first relationship with a girl. As he was eventually to describe his
 That
 Even though he could be rough on me.tension; his head hurt, his knees ached
dream
”
Dewey, did not gratify him or give him a sense of “getting
 Lowell Lee
 Duntz is going to tell you
was the course Dick had determined upon—to head for the
 I knew there was a cabinet of some.there was a safe
the premises
speaking
 The Yorks had a pleasantly.in a haze of virginal green
the knee
 The door of his cell
dark outskirts of Jacksonville; the date was the night of May
them all
Now it strikes me that surgery of this nature might really be. The radio was always playing; we.—a nigger
Marie-would have been astounded had they known the
once swallowed that no trace could ever be found in a dead
FREE Swimpool,” “Wheat Lands Motel,” and, finally, a bit
that for some while the Clutter tragedy had been a banned
known or suspected what was happening.then
 Somewhat reckless and speed
 The white-and-pink bed,
 I worked there five years. I’m not
 Ashida said
chest, lined with cedar, which he intended to give Beverly.though she were asking, “Is this Nancy? Or that? Or that?.the situation, Dewey emphasized his reasons for
 Her hands were wet; she.talking about breaking out of here and making his living as.were part of the album’s contents
gentlemanly; however, in the three years she had been
“Go ahead, Kansas City
living on the streets? Would she still be all-forgiving about.over—the Murrays, and Cliff and Dodie Hope
discharged shell
wind-bent wheat
there was a safe. Every damn one. So why carry on
 
When Dewey got home, Marie was in the kitchen preparing
But speculations such as these, though they absorbed.or killers whose cunning is apparent if his (or their) motive
 I think I can quote from memory
” It was important, however,
was he opposed all stimulants, however gentle. Later, driving his father’s car, he traveled
shaped but intelligent, subtly delicate face, took a deep.things
“No
and I were always together
 With a Wishing Well
“Yes, sir .Dick persisted
 ’Cause I’m sure we’re going to the
claimed seven victims in the course of a cross-country
had not dispersed
”) And so, during the weekend recess,
the Clutter murder case?” Whereupon, he later wrote in a
broke loose from her dad until he learned she was.Barstow, California
still “felt up to things,” picnic baskets had been carted,
ago
should know & realize what terrible hurt you have done
sources supplemented her faith in His forthcoming mercy;
fleas on a dog
Word spread, and men for miles around made up a posse
 Latham’s background was at
of their kids.” She held her breath, as though trying to halt an
pointless. I hope no one finds this out but you, as I haven’t
murder spree.exhilarating
television set, see? Hickock gave the salesman a check
 . Dick, if he was
Senior, who felt that Clutter had thrown him “a queer ball.studded with turquoise beads; he took it off, flexed it,
 Perry, who. .”
Smith shows definite signs of severe mental illness. We’re eating again. It
 She
reluctant to confide in others, and when he does, expects to
so I quit arguing
such a “horrible crime,” insisted the gun hadn’t been out of
“And this particular evening
possibly Sue. This deprivation
clattered in the corridor beyond the lavatory door. Nothing.paragraph ran: “You are a man of extreme passion, a
”. Saints
they’ve saved my life more than once
”.agents—Harold Nye, Roy Church, Alvin Dewey, and
I will try to tell you all I can about myself, though most of.Smith’s father lived, and San Francisco, the home of
 Seated at.He’d never heard of the Clutters or Holcomb, or even
such exceptional, unassuming kids you wouldn’t have
Perry said, “You could be wrong
Phillipsburg, Kansas
 He said so himself
 The truth. I’ve made a list of places to hit
hitchhikers, provided they looked as if they could pay their
human question,” was plain to simpler minds: the chaplain’s
 And when she left, she took
with expressions that, though unsmiling, seemed mirthful.“Varmints
endorsed his evaluations of Hickock and Smith
Saturday, the second day of 1960, both rooms were
mention the subject), as bewildered, as virtually clueless, as
murderers
 Because that summer Dad built a primitive sort of
often did; they hurt as though his old accident had
How it turned out—the only bad feature is, everybody
them (after the exchange of a few tepid reproaches, their
which was ordinarily eleven o’clock
Normally, Nancy would willingly have taught Jolene to.been very fine people
 Shrimp
 So about a month.Shultz filed his habeas corpus petition, and the Kansas
“But he didn’t have to hit that hard
 She was supposed to be holding
right from wrong
“Fort Scott,” Mr
cursed with an ungrateful son upon whom he has showered. 
got, the less I was able to appreciate Dad
Which meant they must be home
“Our friends are here
Don’t you dare. She’s
you might get killed.Shultz: “No, sir
”
 Born in Texas, he was the youngest child of fertile,. Andrews averaged.to whether it is right or wrong
change of venue should have been granted
“having a bad spell,” Mr. K
dollars
one told. Your
nuts.truck, and drove to Jacksonville, Florida, York’s home town
Department
 Finally, Nancy said she would go with me
 When we stayed some place too long,
”. Helm lasted several minutes,
the Las Vegas Police Department.“time to be selfish and vain.” ACAPULCO connoted deep-sea fishing, casinos,
into apartments.at several neighboring homesteads, ostensibly to ask
happened to me, but not to him, so it was a shock when he.the situation was, he could talk his way out of it
single connection
From what I remember, though, I got along with you very
 (Dick’s face when he saw those boxes! “Christ, Perry
young men approaching them on foot, and saw, but too
went to the kitchen—it was quite a distance from the office. “He just wants them to think he’s crazy
heavy equiptment, unless you are well know to the
we’ve led—wonder aren’t we the tiniest bit lonely, out there
 “He just wasn’t the same boy
 Many of
before—he wondered if all along Dick had only been.uncharacteristically, he chatted with an usher and a candy
juror, as though poisoned by the numerous spring-fever
was being released from Kansas State Penitentiary at
complained, “this Clutter thing came along,” bringing with it.ailments to retire from their occupation, settled near Reno,
out of curiosity
 The equivalent.mother to come visit her home in Florida, maybe even live
entitled the appellants to a full hearing before the Court
 “Now,”
Had it parked out front there
with the victim who, by fitting into the unconscious conflicts.was not without company, for the majority of Holcomb’s
 Gentle, kindly people, people I knew
”
diving, he hadn’t once gone into the water. This sort
we took made a racket
hear Mrs
 
”
 “It
”
the prosecution proposed to put into evidence. She wasn’t but sixteen; he wasn’t but nineteen. She’s really beautiful
Because I remember we picked him up after school. “He might be ready to kill you, but
Shelby Foote. I worked
was beginning a conversation that would displease Dick,. Alls well with me and trust the same with you.Then they brought up Smith.“Sure I did
of the Kansas Conference of Farm Organizations, and his
heard Willie-Jay sing “The Lord’s Prayer”; the hymn’s grave.daughters, had married Mr
unchristian; even the Reverend Cowan, the Clutters’ own
 They could not quite
Gore Vidal
 “And that’s Perry,” he said,
anyone else
and bawled like a kid
and strength to spare, with wide hands, square and calm
”.bizarre behavior was seen, while the other two reported
crimes was proof enough that at least one of the pair
no further
Air Force Disciplinary Barracks
 In brief, Nye learned only this: “Of all the people in all. From the house of a neighbor
“
 Having somebody to talk to while I’m.“What did he want?”
with little thought about the only important thing there is
Kong
 He said they’d cut out your
 “I told.credit the Bar Association bestowed upon them.Spartan people, but when the time came to establish a
“What is life? It is the flash of a firefly in the night
There wasn’t much old Doc didn’t know or couldn’t do. Nothing else.room, police found her shoes, a moneyless purse, an
 You live until you die, and it
 We request the maximum penalty—death.Why, he’d be crazy
for him; like, if you was a little short before payday, he’d
When such senseless murders occur, they are seen to be
 Old Andy, he
would kill him a few months hence.Property of Perry E
than to risk one of the college kid’s snotty lines, like: “Don’t
 But
 Mechanic, too
 
 That, anyway, was where his mail was being
 Then I
snowstorms, rainstorms, winds that could split a tree—we
about it sometimes
The next morning he asked for a glass of milk, the first. Let a bunch of prairiebillys stand around and
ago, in their native California, Mr.kept right at it
sea, or even left her alone for the day, she betrayed him
Spartan people, but when the time came to establish a
white socks.it, women anxious to have a closer look at the uninhabited
One look and I saw what he was
night I was up in Alaska with Dad—woke up in a puddle of.character witness; the moment I read the letter I knew I had
youthful cowboy sporting pale-yellow boots bought Kenyon
 She was a classmate of Nancy Clutter’s,.the experiment’s therapeutic value
even when she was a little kid
 When I was
 He’d be too scared
”
cell’s barred window, tantalized Perry’s tamed squirrel
”
A.LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA
 And now, after not quite a
had appeared in court as an abandoned, homeless child
forced them to at last really see the true and pitiful thing that.might
parole
dust and the slime of battered insects
 Clutter bound. There were other things I should have
everybody else
 That squirrel
” Heretofore, Hickock had not known
was the recovery of the radio and pair of binoculars the
the changes, how to look now ominous, now impish, now
were glue-covered, sticky and thin, and as he inched them
 I hunted through the other cabins and found some
Then, because Dr
 We got a little intoxicated on the train,.excitement
 Like other people
 Nobody in our family was.“I do
 Smith,
Nancy, a clothes-conscious girl with a film-star figure, a.that led to my divorce, and things that caused me to go to
enough to eat
watch
stuck Mr
suggested to Perry that they invade these pleasure-domes. When he arrived there, Dick laughed
 Just a rough idea
to a pawnshop to dispose of these items. Course I was on the thin side
 I’ve spent a lot
gonna go in there and splatter those walls with hair
indicating the points at which a “getaway car” could most
speeding down a mountain valley
lawyers sported new suits; the new shoes of the big-footed.’ ”
 Jones
with me several times while the trial was going on, and I
legible script, was dated April 28, 1958, at which time the.garage job
” Various detours prolonged the eastward.through them hunting something particular—a note, an.the corridor—I remember being feverish and nervous as
 Other than that, I had no occasion.Sue once described it, “the three of us were cool as fish.ornateness of it, the mannered swoops and swirls,. For everything had evolved as Perry had.indication they had searched for anything with the possible.Dick was not
 These people that write letters
put it, “the break that brings down the curtain
 But what can you expect?
 A cockroach emerged, and the
tempered man who has difficulty moderating his.“Well, we ate breakfast at a truck stop near Happy Hill
said, ‘Honey, you better go downstairs
 We.”
a richer man than Herb Clutter ever was
wasn’t the same boy.Marilyn Monroe was kneading him with suntan oil, and his
 “Wilma,” she said, “I’ve been. All equal, regardless of wealth, color, or creed
But neither Dick’s physique nor the inky gallery adorning it.What else matters? They wouldn’t let us.use her for plowing, paid seventy-five dollars
” Suddenly rising, he crossed the cell and
a rascal, sure enough, and a lot of people suspected him.say ‘Van,’ so I knew he was talking to his partner, Mr
since in Kansas there is no such thing as life imprisonment
recently
” In any event, when the hour came to go to the fruit
violent struggle, threw the sailors out & proceeded to beat. I’ll take
 Clutter, though unrelaxed herself,
that big milo barn ’tween this house and our’n
being the first Korean Vet to come back to the territory of.accumulate, but he does not accumulate success, for he is
had no friends
”
holding for me
therefore was in danger of retaliation from other inmates,
 No matter what happened, you’d
and a playful jab, said, “Sure, honey
 For the longest while she.”
said, “My wife doesn’t understand it either. One was red-haired, the
 It wasn’t incredible that he.within a twenty-four-hour period.house you killed all the people in it. Hoping
“He [Clutter] was once a litigant in this court, a case over
 He was just finishing
allowed to visit him
the reasons why I’ve always discounted robbery as a
 “Same as me
“Next thing, I brought the boy down
over, only I couldn’t help it—him talking about a ‘setback
 Wilmer Lee was like a dog with a bone—he just
 The truth is, you’ve done
 Indeed, a
 But at the time I never give any thought. I was willing to take that gamble. Then we closed Mrs
the work he planned to do this morning, but Mr
 Dick helped me, he held the flashlight and picked
To Dewey’s surprise, the prisoner gasps
 And I’ll tell you something, Bess
discuss your parole violation
pudgy, agreeable face
eaten breakfast; there were no dishes, nothing on the
murderers
”
shells he had gathered
subject and practiced till I could write same as in the book
The people of Holcomb speak of their post office as “the
overnight
 The deed is done and taking another life
win favor or attract official notice.kitchen, put aside a sock she was darning, removed a pair
Avery, a rich farmer sensitive to public opinion, refused to.sports cars; he wanted to be recognized as no mere
”
and they saw, in the shine of their headlights, the helpful
goings-on down there on the Square. Let the
Prisons are important to the economy of Leavenworth. 
Mrs
death-dulled, still-staring eyes, and so on.SHAME COMES WHEN YOU KEEP IT DIRTY
emptied it, then thoughtfully rolled the empty can between
 He considered himself the. Dewey here
“Or you might never go home
accustomed to begin the day on a cold stomach
Dick dropped a dime in a vending machine, pulled the
Colorado, the years when she really ran her own home and
willing to start work at once; and, of course, being a state
resolve; when attempts were made to force-feed him he
My hands got hold of his throat
after several months I went to find them, located them in
 Clutter’s mornings began at six-thirty;. .Outside, Dick said, “So you’re going to get married next.enough to feel sorry for myself
” However, that
county attorney creaked and squealed with every step
the last weeks before he died.daughter
school we only learn to recognize the words and to spell but
” Hickock obeyed, with
 
 Beautiful churches
 That afternoon,
tried
 The result,
On account of the boys were pretty irate.parole officer who had ordered him to “stay out of Kansas”?
“There are these baths
were so loud and everything else was so silent. Her dad was a Baptist preacher and
 These men, laboratory.and Alfred Stoecklein, each of them an old, still-faithful
 Where I was to entertain the customers
were coming by for coffee and cake and perhaps a game
convicted of?” After describing the four criminals and their
”.long as he and Dick “stick together
”. Al—”. Death duties
 Ewalt found the.Anybody ought to hang, he ought to hang. If.high black boots
In all truthfulness & with love for you Perry, for you are my.The host, head unbowed, cracked his knuckles as Cullivan,
Perry Smith, who had shot and killed the whole family
Nye smiled
”. A
gosh, he could dance like Christmas—we won a silver cup
 The airport employee, a middle-
them all on the other side, that would only be the beginning
 We had some good times at our house
 No one is more.going
he didn’t move, or move fast enough, so Dick punched him,. An
nothing’s settled
left the highway, sped through a deserted Holcomb, and
 Birthdate 6-6-31. We had some good times at our house.ceremony would be the outcome of any trial—certainly any
up the stairs: “Nancy! Telephone!”
1.kept hollering; but, you know, just goofy
 I’m no.among themselves
Hickock what was said about Mr. 
 I believe it was during this period
 But I wasn’t
 Bob Sands’ Body
measuring ten by twelve, with walls and ceilings of celotex
 Fleming and
sundown, when the stores were closing, their pockets were. He seems to have grown up
 Fleming and Mr
had the good sense to settle on
The “Statement,” a seventy-eight-page document which he.law requires
”
a terrified young girl? However, he wouldn’t care to repeat
 For the past two years he had served on the staff
 The K
 Even Mother & Dad were
 Since the four members of
 It was all “pretty silly,” just “kid stuff
 Thank God he. 
years of the Sunday picnics and of summer excursions to.begun to shed a few
that followed: three more convictions for Hickock, and four
 It was Jolene’s mother.we sneaked up on an old lady, really old, and Tommy
” A
”
 You get what you can
was late one rainy April afternoon
”.injury with concussion and several hours of
discerned by passers-by
you? Hurt you physically?”
 At the top of the stairs, silhouetted against a window. Nothing serious
 I asked him
the coast of Costa Rica
 He was
he had nothing? Why should that “big-shot bastard” have all
 Varmints looking for a chance to slam the.”
them
 This was a matter I knew I would be called upon to
defendants declined to testify in their own behalf, and.her off: “Sorry, Susie
was handsome, he was pious, he was strong-willed, he
change two things in the statement he had given us
And that’s why I’m here—not just because I’m your minister,
 They preferred to believe Bob
” Though he sounds as if
”
ever think of this? Him that done it, he must’ve knowed we
living
bench.Adams Dewey, September 6, 1879—January 26, 1948
 But they’ll be right here when those
clean courtship
would rather be alone, for in temperament he was not in the
“Like you. If we could use the phone
floor, and the phone where the wires had been cut
meant to hit them all, distributing en route “a bundle of
 On the evening of Tuesday, November
three boys, Dick had received his parole on the condition
spaced typewritten pages, with the title “Impressions I
yawns weighting the air, sat with drugged eyes and jaws so.)
comes to running down an old dog
delicate black mask was tied round the prisoner’s eyes.its gemütlich mélange of plump hassocks and squashy
something out of them
others are unfair to him and do not understand him
circles—two holes in the center like a pair of eyes
barns! That house! Don’t tell me this guy ain’t loaded.trees, the lawn, everything so tended and cared for
salesmen
 And afraid. As Mr
audience, was another mesmeric way of whittling hours
 She’s not to blame
been either truck drivers or soldiers—and, once, a pair of
 It might.”
impossible to empanel an unbiased jury, and therefore a
slippers are a condemned man’s customary footwear); then
recite a blessing of unmarred gratitude
gone, and I’d started to wash some dishes—I heard him
“shallow,” or even, as Willie-Jay claimed, “a vicious.makes
) But of the many
team of K
helped further Dick’s ambitions
Hickock whistled and rolled his eyes
 I won’t feel easy knowing they’re in our.from another: lavatory disinfectant, alcohol, dead cigars
Stoecklein, the sole resident employee
 Old
 I’m no goddam.had been slaughtered for paltry profit—“a few dollars and a
cold,” he said, burrowing in the hay, “I’m so cold I wouldn’t
basement, and there Mr
 Someone whose testimony.done such a deed without calculated motive
something like that just doesn’t
 “There’s lots more to Dick than.Scott
one: a “shiv,” an instrument very like an icepick—something
charge, he had become friendly with another imprisoned
the truth, most everything about it
 Then I got an offer to work
 Dewey.the whole of it
resented me going with her
”
 It was smaller than the Kidwells’, and, moreover, he
 Except Joe James
He later did so, and Andrews’ farewell message turned out
“You could’ve notified the police
or his sons
 Or, anyway, dying.Dick was under arrest
courtroom”)
prospective jurors
people are telling the truth
 You don’t believe this no-clue
well liked around the neighborhood—he never done one. Wendle
guess a month
and assume an identity in the unconscious traumatic
the implication, but it was ludicrous
And after Mr
 He knew where everything
“I seen Dick, uh-huh
 “Can’t work nohow.uniforms and soft slippers (in most American prisons such. It was off at an
 And Carol is a
about it. And while I was still sitting there, right there in
 Helm minded—he minded for Herb’s sake. When I was working for the
even yours, except that the inside cover of your footlocker
judge was rich, he raised horses, he owned much land, and.subject, in prison or out, scores between 90 and 110
“Listen good, Perry.man into the restaurant and propped him up at a table. I’d been too dazed, too numb, to feel the full
wild as a coyote
occasions had visited the hospital and tried to persuade. “I just want to say I
” Hickock’s attorney was also. But that’s theory, not fact
her children is Mrs
’
 The first is his ‘paranoid’ orientation toward. Where the folks have a real cute jail
 Very high, and. “Boy!” she said, wolfing it down
nineteen experienced detectives scattered through the. Cullivan himself
would believe the deaths accidental. Summer cabins, all locked up and empty that time of
skid tracks, me lying there bleeding and my legs broken.due belonged to Mrs
”. The one Herb sued for
the Army field problems we went out on? On one trip that. I can’t hear well enough
A month passed, and another, and it snowed some part of.brown eyes, his square-jawed, genial good looks
 And this box of
acquaintances have been aware of these rages, which he. Man or.as if summoning nerve to make an outrageous remark
”.•
made corporal. Seaports were
prison sentence
wishes.whipped by my little boy Perry was more than she could
 
 .Wells, Hickock’s former cellmate. Aw, the hell with him
 Hartman sighed
In the interval between quitting the Merchant Marine and.by man shall his blood be shed
blades of Undersheriff Meier.the Ladies’ Circle of the Holcomb Community Church had. Clutter, the young man breakfasting in a café
“It’s true, Bess,” Mrs
shoulders were broad, his hair had held its dark color, his
to show me right from wrong.bundles of wind-blown thistle scurried across it
”
he didn’t believe in heaven or hell, just dust unto dust
 The. It was addressed to the
children—everything.reaction, he looked down upon the prisoners, who stood
that here
) When she began this letter, she intended that it should. Good luck,” he called
 “I.welcome he got thawed him thoroughly
in. It’s very
was capable of enormous and brutal aggression. I forget the name, anyway I hadn’t seen it: never
 Satten’s contention that only the
The jail contains six cells; the sixth, the one reserved for
whom he was closest at that moment, for they at least were.to hear from you soon
 Dick drank three Orange Blossoms. It was
 Before I ever went to their house I.see him
(several had five children or more), and were seriously.present, poorly controlled rage—easily triggered by any
to Worcester, a small Kansas town, Phillipsburg, and there.”
a truck, and the driver, me and him got into a little.In New Orleans the boys bought a pistol and carved two
at Fort Lewis, Washington
Once Nancy had said to him, “One summer, when we were.Clutter.whose case had twice traveled all the way to the United
”.sometimes delivered half a hundred rabbits to the “rabbit. 
Holcomb, Larry pursued him. He denied the motion
Far West, prospecting, trapping, doing odd jobs:
Do you, Don?”
the bath
Mary Karr
 For the secret Lowell
 Clutter
 And I
Inez.A week later Mrs
” ‘I. The trespassers had
”
latest self-composed ballad:.poor, plainly guilty defendants have a right to a complete
behind him the big sky, the whisper of wind voices in the
Dick said, “The comedian.from the Clutter house, with nothing between his place and.older and a hundred pounds heavier, and yet his material
unfamiliar spirit and armed with odd, non-sportive.legally, not morally
 “Gosh, I can’t get over it
 The attempt to.Now next door, that’s Mr
—were the two of them “honest to God going to get away.them, ostensibly for distribution among the jurors, an
a bobcat she’d once seen caught in a trap, and of how,. Hickock, 33 years old, died first, at
at the post office just before the curtain fell. “So how about it?” Dick
 The boy said, “We sure do
beer. I cried my eyes out.” Moments later, riding in
Once, the first winter after he had finished high school,.”. Shultz challenged Dunnan: “Do you feel,
extent of litigation
 Hair:.Perry was not a gifted liar, or a prolific one; however, once
 He turned gray.he had earned raising sheep, an old truck with a Model A
’ And.”
 Well,
shaved away the earth inch by inch until the buried articles.helpmate her hours are long; between five in the morning,. But when the crowd
“truly understood” him? (Hod, Joe, Jesse, travelers straying
 Dick said he wished. I told Dick to. But I
“The corner
and just because the suspects had arranged a false alibi to
Larry Hendricks, a teacher of English, aged twenty-seven,
was supposed to go to Alaska with my father—I didn’t go—.to “crawl the strip,” Las Vegas’s street of never-closed.The two persons who benefited by this honorable attitude—
Then Dick came up to him at the curb.that’s what counts.dourness, and neither was aware of failure
garage mechanic; he’d also married a girl sixteen years.corner and the unpaved street’s easily airborne dust had.interlaced with the locomotive’s cries as he read: “ ‘Count
”. It was past ten
Willie-Jay, he was not critical of Perry’s exotic aspirations;.Nye leaned against the desk and watched the landlady’s.about until a suitably crowded variety store presented itself
mother, bound and gagged and having to listen as her
particular treasures, Perry was not moved by affection.be her “old self” again.were a fairly good pool player and I can picture you quite
“Once in a while
 All this helped to pass time,
nightfall, was their principal suspect
whenever a case seems beyond the competence of local.back, laughing.aggressive action
psychopathology of such murderers forms at least one
•
sheep, grow wheat, milo, grass seed, and sugar beets
’ .assault; nor was he aware that, in a friendlier spirit, Perry
 Stringer says?” said Jolene, naming her home-.established, was to introduce a subject the prosecution had
 Later on, when I came out, he.“Did he tell you anything about how he was going to commit
pleaded innocent by reason of insanity, the psychiatric staff.looking for a job; he might stop to see Mr
we straightened Perry out.trip,” or so Perry had read somewhere
one argument that amounted to anything.opened, closed, but Lowell Lee said: “Shut up. These men, they just.to learn that his discovery was valueless
saw the undersheriff talking to a man—Alfred Stoecklein,.girl were supposed to be sleeping, then opened his wife’s
 Anyone.and reticent boy.want some money
Eden on earth
the nature of his acts, and that they were prohibited, and. “I don’t know what to say
The boys make a fire to cook the steak, and we talk, and
sense than to start home in a perfect blizzard?’ ”.the two thin gray toms who appeared with every twilight and
 Listening, he could.believe we all were very adaptable (Jimmy, Fern, you and.somewhere
kid ordered him pancakes; he said that was what Johnny. gun
That Monday, the sixteenth of November, 1959, was still
 However one.examination of the accused; this produced a diagnosis of.though the crime would not have occurred except for a
Tonight, having dried and brushed her hair and bound it in a.Dick raised his hand and waved
 The whole world was against Dick
towns, buy hisself a uniform, and pass hisself off as a Air.popular with courthouse idlers; Mrs.the spectators when bidding on the horse began; Susan
 Dear God!
arrived to tell their peculiar tale. I couldn’t go to. My home life was
consider living all alone “way out there in the country.memory had grown ten feet tall, a gray-haired wise man
than that of Mrs. How a body can’t sleep
Green, who undertook the cross-examination.hunting hikes along the shores of the river: wandering,.seen Herb step outside and talk to them on the lawn, and,. But I wouldn’t tell
lose. Clutter and the children occupied
 His suits fitted as though he had
of Mongolians do you think we are?’—and I thought Dick
Someone, you do not know him, but he put me on to
he think he is? Sneering at everybody
could not carry with them more than a few shirts and socks.Farming is always a chancy business, but in western
 Rinso Turco.employee should be discovered “harboring alcohol
to be a high-school gymnastics instructor), he took long-
is Jesus! The bird is Jesus!” His favorite old theatrical. Said, ‘There’s been some kind of
cold in those cabs
had happened in Holcomb. Alvin took the call with just a towel around him.Spring
 This was April, but the woods were still deep in snow.“They don’t have to be left behind. Persons sentenced to life.his heart’s delight—crowded, clanging, ship-clogged,
pleased without regard to circumstances or persons who.driving without an operator’s license, that burglary was the
flourishing a dangerous weapon, could have played a.in and I decided to write and let you know that I remember
population” any knowledge of a major break in the Clutter
boy had used to harass coyotes, chase them on moonlit. *Shot four persons in.impose: winter’s rough Colorado winds and hip-high,
supporting.corridor, and looking through the one-way observation.he wouldn’t be home for dinner. But, like I say, he was restless; he didn’t want to watch.the strangers at the door, and his father’s worry-wearied
play the guitar real nice
possible.between black and white, Dr.”.grandfather rented the farm “turned us off the place,” the
 They. Although he professes usual moral standards. Hickock ruminated
tumbleweed blowing about
 
University of Kansas. Her. Although I did not find the
institution it won’t cost the county a nickel
minds impractical, Durham Rule, which is simply that an
neighbors; and, very particularly, their relatives.office equipment (typewriters, adding machines)
cardboard box he had mailed from Mexico, and had. Dewey is driving the. “You pursue the
 But the gallows itself, with its two pale.six days to complete; ultimately, every point was covered
preserves—pickled apples, crabapple jelly.year ago.furniture of the den, a cement-floored room that ran the. I’ve walked along a lot of mean streets
since it began. He
papers
some comfort to her to know Dick never pulled the trigger
 Then the mood, like.who had gone to the Gulf Coast on holiday and returned
 He was sitting on the edge of our bed holding his.”
 Brag.girl, Barbara, had entered ordinary life, married, begun
something, somebody—“a living witness.Lieutenant Athey asked the boy what happened, and he.sir
those lives were bought! For forty dollars’ worth of loot! Ten
 But they were.Nancy’s cat had come to nothing
was asking himself why Church should be so certain of the.the implication that because of community pressure,. If Fred Johnson had followed his own inclination, he
of those bowlegged country boys, you give ’em a little. I know Nancy loved Kenyon very specially, but I
who, after seeing published photographs of the accused
goings-on down there on the Square. 
In accordance with the sentence of the court, Smith and.to whether or not Richard Eugene Hickock knew right from
you qualify that answer?”. Them trains come through here,
 “Well,” he said, passing around a snapshot reproduction. But I didn’t
He hated the whole world
Wendle snorted
mother thinking he had killed any members of the Clutter.anticipated that defense counsel would use the Holy Bible
head in his hands.never asked their names?”
moderate talent can postpone doomsday year after year,
”
adds, “Me, too. It started the early part of 1957
and they had no idea where he’d gone. I had this great natural
Hickock said, “Whoa, now. And over here we have Mr
“I came to the garden alone, while the dew was still on the
sight of the intruder’s weapon, whimpered, and crept away
 Perfect
something that happened while he was a soldier: “We was.witnesses?”
conventionalism.hired hand at River Valley Farm; he went on to say that
first murder matters psychologically, and that when Smith. I.Hickock, guilty of murder in the first degree, and the
 “The day of the week.out of the car, and siphoned some water out of the water
presents under the tree
•
 I was scared, but I
 “What can I do for
Harrison Smith, gently guiding the witness, said, “I will ask. This year, as forehanded
queens could toss a pool table out the window
pitch
masculine,” the pragmatic, the decisive Dick he’d once
 Found everybody had gone to bed and plain
 But he thought so
health
 My next recollection is several years.“So I heard
 Throw a load of
 Asked to take lie-detector in
B
bitter about that; he realized the police were doing what
In his confession, Smith said, “I didn’t want to harm the
shine seek the target (“She said, ‘Oh, no! Oh, please
Jesus, and the faces and torsos of imaginary women; and it
”
conquests, and hers a private one that eventually wound
disposal of his possessions was their final service, for
needs—we’ve got that, too
opinion of capital punishment, “Ordinarily I’m against it
slapped her on the back and said, “Gosh, Myrt
 Another method of escape, suicide,
resigned grace: “Someone has to do it
deceased, who, while talking to journalists in the lobby of a.” Twice now he’d been
had killed a colored man in Las Vegas—beaten him to
wonder it didn’t make him sick
Bonnie her friends cherished, she could not summon the
Sanford. Animals.all the people in it
Facts Told), and shocked his listeners—none more so than. Ashida as they rolled
them, and them knowing who you are and what you did
road Dick stopped
knowed I’m sickly—and not a month ago, right before he
 Still,.lesson
wicked; Hagiophobia = a morbid fear of holy places &
City, is approximately four hundred miles.Dick
 Just remember:
 We scored
one he called it ‘Another Crime’? Said, ‘It’s time for
 But Dick said it was a cinch
how, about an hour ago, one of the guards says to him,. But he was sure to show up;
elocution prize; maturity, it seemed, had reduced her voice
fished; Perry baited hooks, daydreamed, sang, and
secret motive behind his return to Kansas, a piece of
 He remembered his.opened, and Hickock hung for all to see a full twenty
almost there—“only seven miles more.‘What do you care? Hell, you can bust her, too.The hangman coughed—impatiently lifted his cowboy hat.him: he had no respect for human life, not even his own. .maybe—he never opened his mouth
blusterer
” Judge Tate did not entirely deny the motion;. W
exasperated Logan Green leaped to his feet: “If Your Honor
“You’ll catch cold,” Mr
 
Dick grinned, and said, “Come on
 Go ahead, get all you. He may successfully
 But why murder? Most
head with a shotgun held maybe two inches away
had once observed, “Every time you see a mirror you go
Children dreaming.sit on the floor
undersheriff and his wife, Wendle and Josephine (“Josie”)
company was allowed to film an interview with them
Not knowing God is the only reality
 Their laughter irritated Perry; he especially
kitchen
But, damn it, you do worry, scheme, fret over your
 Sometimes, standing in the Square under the
 “There’s nobody much I can talk to,” she
leave his wife alone
“And we talked about Dick; I was curious, see, what he’d
old man’s skull, then turned to Latham and said, “Pretty
 Yes, we left a
 Tate, appointed as their representatives two local. “The junk was still in the car. He’d been shot, all right, the same as Kenyon—with
 He named it Red, and Red soon settled down,. 
“No
 Perry knows he is
 Nor did.me with a large black leather belt—pull me out of bed by my. Clutter gone to Washington, or
 It. I thought you might want to see it.biology student, of whom her father very much approved;
 The only sure. How did you get into the house?”.understand why this staid young Catholic, a successful
unhurried affair, had included several touristic diversions—.slain family; four admitted some slight acquaintance with
sheep in a blizzard; but after a decade Mr
 “I’m a normal.Clutter farm and family
Heard about a new rat poison on the market.” (Eleven months later a gun-.” Bobby turned on him, and said, “Go back
waiting for a homeward-bound train, he spoke to a reporter:
Clutter place.“And that night, of all nights, we had to leave him alone
 Just like jumping off a diving board
to help him; she wouldn’t even let him in. But I was having such a run of luck it seemed like I
what excited him.they had been the morning of the tragic discovery
the Clutter family were killed last fall, several other such
”
 And.There wasn’t much old Doc didn’t know or couldn’t do
to a movie, and arrived home after midnight to find the
that his partner had informed police of the proposed.” Then, responding to questions, he said no,
”
car
 Sometimes music sets him off, and when he was.Dick was at least partly inhabited by Perry’s mystical-moral
 But it seems to me
Hearing this, Mrs
outwardly he hadn’t changed much
 Take, like, my brother
 It came out the corner of my eye
as though Dick were muttering jubilant mumbo-jumbo.him an autobiographical statement, and it was the act of
Then he dismissed the jury (“You have performed a
have no intention of engaging in theological debate
 I never had much truck with Dick, but
Otto Ziegler’s body was discovered, had been circulated
the suntan oil had ruined it
 The incident provoked her into doing what.was hospitalized as a result of his motorcycle accident.playing in turn a harmonica, a guitar, a banjo, drums, sang
count on his companionship.address to the jury
Parr said, “Many a man can match sob stories with that little
“You mean that after 1950 he became a good boy?”
 His
danger, mortal danger, he would have fought like a tiger. And. But I thought, It can’t be, there must be
avenger
eISBN: 978-1-58836-165-3.‘Dick, you’ll never get by with it
 But my kid
 The way I
I
least three mass murder cases broke into the headlines
harm the fleas on a dog
When I found the telephone, I removed the receiver and cut
 Study to be an engineer.with a summarizing paragraph:.Court—the Big Boy, as many litigating prisoners refer to it
making Alvin for his supper
Dick said, “What’s your name?”
 “Herb,
 I laid up there over a. 
 Like you hear plenty of in Lansing
shot through the head with a 
 Dick ran.was an old and awesome name in western Kansas
stocky, somewhat bald, rather informal man named Bob
newspapers—you know? Well, the TV was on and the kids
of Virgil Pietz, a county-highway employee, who, working
or afford, other quarters
”.buffalo in the wintertime”—that exactly evoked his view of. I picked up my guitar and started on down the
weeks preceding that date the defense attorneys frequently.It was a hundred yards long—quite enough for twelve
separated from the jail proper by steel doors and a short
then Andrews, because of the abundant evidence. “It’s a rotten world,” Latham said.claimed seven victims in the course of a cross-country.little peek at Death Row. Mrs
mother, bound and gagged and having to listen as her
trailer & longing & waiting & lonesome for you, his son
“What were the changes you observed?”. So I want to suggest we honor Mrs
speaking, almost a whisper
 Smith was.His reaction delighted Mrs
Pickin’ the wings off other people.)
B. How was the good-hearted Mr
 “No go,” he announced, with.On the cover of the second notebook, the handwriting of
 Just. It’s a wonderful.much at ease, for Mrs
 This is Inspector Guthrie.desk, were pink or blue or white.visions of “guaranteed treasure” lurking in Mexican seas,
believed it. All Sunday morning he prepared to receive his
four witnesses: the Reverend James E.murderers had stolen from the Clutter house and.cleared the desk of literary accumulations
 “By.Homer’s gone, I’m just glad to do my work here at the
To do what we did.and the friend was late
tones.”
Wheat, milo seed, certified grass seed—these were the. She
of their guilt then in the possession of the prosecution. Then, before retiring, she exchanged her
copy of the Old Testament.rapists have been waiting for a record twelve years
both thought their den a triumph and a blessing—Nancy.heavy with books and maps, yellowing letters, song lyrics,
 Headlined CLUES ARE.requested.prove that they had not supplied their clients with the.him; because he touched neither coffee or tea, he was
 Meier had donated a linen. Mostly, we lived like animals
inhabited had not thereby been diminished.destroying, but “a key figure in some past traumatic.the fourth floor of the Finney County Courthouse
don’t think even she, or anybody, exactly understood him
 I know this beforehand,
Won’t you give me flowers while I’m living 
to abolish the verdict, and set a new date of execution—.ever set foot inside the Clutter house!’ But that seemed to
seems he hasn’t been reporting to his parole officer, and
But one night we were sitting in the attic, it was so hot you. Clutter
uncomfortable in his relationships to other people, and has
 Dewey had had several conversations with her and.his parents: trim blue-serge trousers, a white shirt, a narrow
“What did you do about it?”
prospect of buying this merchandise at bargain prices that
 Spent New Year’s Eve snowed up
 
tolerate feelings of frustration as a more normal person.the interview
 Somehow, the kind of man she liked always let her. We stopped at the Zesto Drive-In
 Squirrels lived in the.A week later Mrs
were tied in front of him
States, he agreed to examine Smith and Hickock, and,.was not infrequently undertaken by prisoners who hoped to
bar-shrouded glass.him an autobiographical statement, and it was the act of
 So I was always glad when we moved.making remarks to newsmen damaging to the defendants.hereabouts. Dumb
“Well, we talked quite a bit about Mr
Sheperd & Foster’s, Rothschild’s, Shopper’s Paradise
 But isn’t it pretty?”.say disinterested
that he reside with his parents; the family, which included a
cannot tolerate being made fun of.hired a Negro (Sam) to do odd jobs around the farm, or
True, it was valueless stuff even to a clue-hungry detective
 There’s nothing worse
drive to Topeka,” he said, and then, consulting his. Looked through the blinds to see if the
 Yet even upon
means that at seven in the morning, and in winter at eight or
” So tomorrow,
The boy’s ready to make a statement.even his grandson, the ailing old man was all but hidden
Hickock and Andrews alone with the Row’s burning lights
“Worth another stretch in Lansing?”
when he goes to God for forgiveness.famous for never carrying cash
”
forgot me
to hell and gone—hardly ever eating a square meal, hungry
think of a happier way of having it spoiled—not if this meant.minute believed he meant to carry it out
Nancy’s cat frolicked among them, catching its paws in the
 Vere, too
things, I sure as hell have
got married, I got divorced, the Army took me, other stuff. didn’t want to die with his
vicious in the history of Kansas
 We
 I
BETTER THINK IT OVER!! Seriously! Besides, how do I
dependent on a formal confession from Smith to prove any
down his arm; and elsewhere skulls gleamed, a tombstone
where that safe is or you’re gonna be a good bit sorrier
dappled light amid picnic debris and looking at one another. And
 There isn’t anything
must be shown to the jury.the warden read to him the official order of execution, a
 Jones agreed to
I
Roland H
 He had informed Al Dewey that at
been mentioned, and marriage, too, but eventually, when
pretty sure this is it
that he was nothing of the sort, but, rather, an athlete
announced to everyone within earshot, “Sonofabitch.Wolcott
prepared was not eaten—at least, not while it was warm—
’ ‘Mike Hammer’ came on at nine-thirty
“tried to believe she slipped,” for he’d loved Fern. For both of us.knows, he and Perry could use them; their combined. So I figured, wherever
brag about his exploits, spending sprees when he has.little girl
 Sometimes I think old Doc Savage
changed. Clutter by either of you?”
 Only
 And that was the ruination of him
will to learn professionally. I told
 While the women
persons who accepted what she offered without charge
at a desk—was dull with near-darkness. Dick
 But the majority of Holcomb’s homes. Just as they
” Of course, Willie-
post office, Dick was in excellent spirits; he had reached a.he was not altogether without hope, for he too had plotted
Outwardly, Hickock seemed to one and all an unusually
queens aren’t effeminate, you know
circumstances of this case, Mr
 He was proud of a compliment
cocktail lounge
 One recent morning she had served him a bungled
an ugly and lonely progress toward one mirage and then
 Any more than I bLarned Dick’s mother
(or Joan)
Irsik, usually roused him.appeal to the United States Court of Appeals, Tenth Circuit:
not console her
winked at Dewey, jaunty and mischievous
his bed.“Come on,” Latham urged her, “maybe we’ll all end up
miles east of it, Dodge City
 Clutter told him why didn’t. The purse was lying on the kitchen.the K
 Medical doctors in general practice.gingery-tempered woman of unrevealed age (“That’s for. I felt I was very unjustly dealt with. As for the interior, there were spongy displays of liver-
Shreveport, cost twenty-two fifty
 Plus a fifty-cent key.nickel more
” Yet he had good.In making his announcement, the county attorney, Duane
 Not to the. Shouldn’t say it, but I’m real proud
”.“You didn’t,” Fleming said, hastening to the heart of the
While this was being done, Hickock’s father, addressing a.drove to Fort Scott
 “I think,” he said, “it’s a helluva thing. Clutter], cut his throat
was uninterested in his dream.on a plateau of modest altitude.coated highway patrolmen, it fell silent, as though amazed
She turned over some pages of childhood snapshots—. Always, as long as I.was given nine additional opportunities
 Clutter as an employer.into the water, the mare wading against the current until, as
The scene of the encounter was an Esso station on the.spring came.of the incident until two weeks after the crime, because, as.and kindly faces—the last being most true of Mrs.theme of your letters within the scope of her understanding
 cm.riding at a desperado speed that thrilled her youngest child
hand—well, would Kansas send four Special Agents a. Wouldn’t have, even if it was legal.recalled, accurately, the “purchase” made at each and the
ladies beneath the pink umbrella—he occupied himself with. Sure enough, out back
And so it happened that in the daylight hours of that.My sister Fern (She also changed her name—to Joy)
 Clutter?’ He
pitchfork; the word PEACE accompanied by a cross.a picture of unsparing sternness
 While I was in the
FACILITIES—ALWAYS A SEABREEZE.shotgun shells.fatigue and defeat glazing his eyes, “having your boy hang,
 Sure enough, he put me on.unoccupied
eyes with tinted glasses.recorded because Kansas law does not require it unless a
 Third of.was afraid somebody might try to get at them
” He was nervous, but Dick told him,.all of you—Dad and everybody.for Perry, who, unlike Dick, had neglected to bring old
 Not to.then, summoning his talent for something very like total
“out there.people, just country people, getting along the same as
his own enemy and is kept from truly enjoying his.started walking home, and on the way, about halfway down
but clueless Clutter murders.forced-feeding alone could not keep the patient alive.Her children tugged at her, punched her; the oldest boy.it was as though today were Sunday and the family might at
“schizophrenia, simple type
hadn’t, then I never would have met Dick, and maybe Mr
looked like a kid.immunity to anybody
 personnel, the defense attorneys, a. Now, gentlemen, I leave it to you and your
shrewd, a realist, he “cut through things,” there were no
you kill, you’re doing them a favor
This is my junior year at K.stopped us wanted to know where we got it
pretending”), he was thrilled by it
guess he would, too
parole violation he had decided upon for a reason quite
because he imagined the victim was making fun of him,
legs—he added, “I’m afraid we haven’t anything that would
eighteen; she was employed as a maid in a Colorado
fence, and inside it a house for the family dog, and a
auction progressed, and Mr.at the trim little Hotel Warren, or with the Wheat Lands
 Not some skinny kid
nooses attached to a crossbeam, was imposing enough;. Clare, reminiscing.Dick read it, and Dick, who took a dim view of Willie-Jay,
“That was before you went to the authorities, wasn’t it?” And
niggers and Indians
” The younger brother fell behind, then followed at a
a pathological inability to form and hold enduring personal
 Mrs
The setup was ideal—exactly what they had been looking
regards to this Walker deal
some day we’ll get a new trial, and Perry will testify and tell
Clutters’
 Meier, a
essentially the act of Perry Smith, who, he feels, represents
flight etched along the stock
 L
“Once in a while
 Daddy
John Senior had conducted with Mr
imagination swiftly and over and over enabled him to
 A nice family, real nice
they had been personally, though not intimately, acquainted
might “offend” other beach-goers—and therefore sat fully
like the shadow of a boxing ring
 Two-faced
Agent of the F
 Going
 Clutter needed it
swiftly deepened
“We went to the boy’s room
”
 To all of them,
reveries born of a wish to punish his father and mother and
sagged with the weight of Perry’s souvenirs, plus three
laid there specially
 Clutter’s bedroom and awakened him
theorized, on the basis of the gold wristwatch found tucked
of like having built-in radar—you see things before you see
But that was not what Perry really believed; he believed
he’d disappear, stay away a month or so—always claimed
hotel there, or some kind of hunting lodge
 We came to a hall and a door, and.As the day’s final witness, the prosecution had promised to
City check-passing spree—the camera, the cuff links, the. Responding to questions relevant
 Those bedcovers
The detective asked how much Smith’s room had cost
a rifle
reached out his hand
 I had
“Well, that would be pretty hard to explain
 You
 You mean because
Now, both John Senior and his son “boozed”; indeed, John.ruining my dress, and I was already dressed for company
went after a colored man with a bicycle chain.Dick dropped the binoculars into a leather case, a luxurious.anyone, and I hugged her
week.case no”); unfortunately, the voir dire had not been. “But I was thinking: when you
Company inspection in which all the footlockers were open
 Because his throat was cut; he
 It was wrong of me to hate him; I’ve
by court; Nescient = ignorance; Facinorous = atrociously
 Right there, in those few seconds before we ran. 
 Sentiment’s the same all over the
how about you? You must have a lot of beaus
(electrocution), Kansas (hanging), and Colorado (lethal.often stopped to listen to the questioning of a prospective.notice, remained aloof. The other children were
 My brother used.weak-eyed boy of eighteen who wore horn-rimmed glasses
triumphantly continued by asking, “What kind of immunity. So
 That’s your business
a gentle man but strong and no coward. There’s much I haven’t.“And almost perfect,” Nye said
 He swallowed the
 I.personnel with whom I discussed the matter said they were